BACKGROUND: Optimal drug treatment for patients with resistant hypertension is undefined. We aimed to test the hypotheses that resistant hypertension is most often caused by excessive sodium retention, and that spironolactone would therefore be superior to non-diuretic add-on drugs at lowering blood pressure. METHODS: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial, we enrolled patients aged 18-79 years with seated clinic systolic blood pressure 140 mm Hg or greater (or >/=135 mm Hg for patients with diabetes) and home systolic blood pressure (18 readings over 4 days) 130 mm Hg or greater, despite treatment for at least 3 months with maximally tolerated doses of three drugs, from 12 secondary and two primary care sites in the UK. Patients rotated, in a preassigned, randomised order, through 12 weeks of once daily treatment with each of spironolactone (25-50 mg), bisoprolol (5-10 mg), doxazosin modified release (4-8 mg), and placebo, in addition to their baseline blood pressure drugs. Random assignment was done via a central computer system. Investigators and patients were masked to the identity of drugs, and to their sequence allocation. The dose was doubled after 6 weeks of each cycle. The hierarchical primary endpoints were the difference in averaged home systolic blood pressure between spironolactone and placebo, followed (if significant) by the difference in home systolic blood pressure between spironolactone and the average of the other two active drugs, followed by the difference in home systolic blood pressure between spironolactone and each of the other two drugs. Analysis was by intention to treat. The trial is registered with EudraCT number 2008-007149-30, and ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02369081. FINDINGS: Between May 15, 2009, and July 8, 2014, we screened 436 patients, of whom 335 were randomly assigned. After 21 were excluded, 285 patients received spironolactone, 282 doxazosin, 285 bisoprolol, and 274 placebo; 230 patients completed all treatment cycles. The average reduction in home systolic blood pressure by spironolactone was superior to placebo (-8.70 mm Hg [95% CI -9.72 to -7.69]; p<0.0001), superior to the mean of the other two active treatments (doxazosin and bisoprolol; -4.26 [-5.13 to -3.38]; p<0.0001), and superior when compared with the individual treatments; versus doxazosin (-4.03 [-5.04 to -3.02]; p<0.0001) and versus bisoprolol (-4.48 [-5.50 to -3.46]; p<0.0001). Spironolactone was the most effective blood pressure-lowering treatment, throughout the distribution of baseline plasma renin; but its margin of superiority and likelihood of being the best drug for the individual patient were many-fold greater in the lower than higher ends of the distribution. All treatments were well tolerated. In six of the 285 patients who received spironolactone, serum potassium exceeded 6.0 mmol/L on one occasion. INTERPRETATION: Spironolactone was the most effective add-on drug for the treatment of resistant hypertension. The superiority of spironolactone supports a primary role of sodium retention in this condition. FUNDING: The British Heart Foundation and National Institute for Health Research.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia is an increasingly prevalent condition affecting > 50% of men > 65 years of age. Although it is a condition that is unlikely to be life threatening, it can significantly affect quality of life with distressing lower urinary tract symptoms. Increasingly, medical therapy is being used as first-line treatment for men with moderate-to-severe lower urinary tract symptoms. Two main pharmacological classes of drugs are used: 5alpha-reductase inhibitors and alpha-1 selective blockers. Both these classes of drugs have shown good tolerability and clinical efficacy. This article examines the potential benefit of the use of combination therapy. In particular, what is the evidence for using doxazosin and finasteride therapy together?
PURPOSE: Preoperative medical management is critical to prevent intraoperative cardiovascular complications in patients with pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PPGLs). Initial treatment involves alpha-adrenergic receptor blockers. However, while the routine use of metyrosine alongside these blockers is not strongly recommended due to a lack of evidence supporting its efficacy and associated safety concerns, there are previous studies on combination therapy with phenoxybenzamine and metyrosine. There are few reports on combination therapy with the selective alpha1-adrenergic receptor blocker doxazosin. Therefore, we investigated this combination treatment, which theoretically can affect perioperative outcomes in patients with PPGLs. To our knowledge, this is the first such study. METHODS: This retrospective single-center observational study involved 51 patients who underwent surgical resection of PPGLs at Kobe University Hospital between 2014 and 2022. All patients received doxazosin at maximum doses. Fourteen patients received concomitant metyrosine, while 37 received doxazosin alone. Their perioperative outcomes were compared. RESULTS: No severe event, such as acute coronary syndrome, was observed in either group. Intraoperatively, the doxazosin + metyrosine group exhibited a lower median minimum systolic blood pressure (56 [54-60] vs. 68 [59-74] mmHg, P = 0.03) and required lower median remifentanil (P = 0.04) and diltiazem (P = 0.02) doses than the doxazosin-alone group. CONCLUSION: The combination of metyrosine and doxazosin as a preoperative treatment for PPGLs affects intraoperative circulatory hemodynamics, such as a reduced occurrence of blood pressure elevation during surgery. Further research is necessary to identify patients who will benefit most from this combination treatment.
Objective: The aim of this study was to determine the efficacy of doxazosin, an alpha(1)-adrenergic antagonist, for the treatment of co-occurring posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and alcohol use disorder (AUD). Methods: This 12-week, double-blind, randomized controlled trial of doxazosin (16 mg/d) was conducted between June 2016 and December 2019 at the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center in Charleston, South Carolina. Participants were military veterans (N = 141) who met DSM-5 criteria for current PTSD and AUD and were randomly assigned to receive doxazosin (n = 70) or placebo (n = 71). Primary outcome measures were the Clinician Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS-5), the PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5), and the Timeline Follow-Back (TLFB). Results: Findings from the intent-to-treat analyses revealed that participants in both groups demonstrated statistically significant reductions in CAPS-5 and PCL-5 scores (P < .0001), but, contrary to hypotheses, no significant differences were observed between groups. Percent drinking days and percent heavy drinking days also decreased significantly during treatment, but there were no differences between groups (P < .0001). Abstinence during treatment was significantly higher in the doxazosin versus the placebo group (22% vs 7%, P = .017); however, participants in the doxazosin group consumed a greater number of drinks on drinking days (6.15 vs 4.56, P = .0096). A total of 74.5% of the sample completed the treatment phase, and there were no group differences in retention or adverse events. Conclusions: Doxazosin was safe and tolerable but was not more effective than placebo in reducing PTSD or AUD severity in this dually diagnosed sample. Clinical considerations such as heterogeneity of PTSD and AUD presentation and potential moderators are discussed in the context of future research directions. Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02500602.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Terazosin, doxazosin, and alfuzosin (Tz/Dz/Az) are alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonists that also bind to and activate a key adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-producing enzyme in glycolysis. It is hypothesized that the increase in energy availability in the brain may slow or prevent neurodegeneration, potentially by reducing the accumulation of alpha-synuclein. Recent work has suggested a potentially neuroprotective effect of the use of Tz/Dz/Az in Parkinson disease in both animal and human studies. We investigated the neuroprotective effects of Tz/Dz/Az in a closely related disease, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). METHODS: We used a new-user active comparator design in the Merative Marketscan database to identify men with no history of DLB who were newly started on Tz/Dz/Az or 2 comparator medications. Our comparator medications were other drugs commonly used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia that do not increase ATP: the alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist tamsulosin or 5alpha-reductase inhibitor (5ARI). We matched the cohorts on propensity scores and duration of follow-up. We followed up the matched cohorts forward to estimate the hazard of developing DLB using Cox proportional hazards regression. RESULTS: Men who were newly started on Tz/Dz/Az had a lower hazard of developing DLB than matched men taking tamsulosin (n = 242,716, 728,256 person-years, hazard ratio [HR] 0.60, 95% CI 0.50-0.71) or 5ARI (n = 130,872, 399,316 person-years, HR 0.73, 95% CI 0.57-0.93). while the hazard in men taking tamsulosin was similar to that of men taking 5ARI (n = 159,596, 482,280 person-years, HR 1.17, 95% CI 0.96-1.42). These results were robust to several sensitivity analyses. DISCUSSION: We find an association in men who are taking Tz/Dz/Az and a lower hazard of DLB compared with similar men taking other medications. When combined with the literature of Tz/Dz/Az on Parkinson disease, our findings suggest that glycolysis-enhancing drugs may be broadly protective in neurodegenerative synucleinopathies. A future randomized trial is required to assess these associations for causality. CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class III evidence that Tz/Dz/Az use reduces the rate of developing DLB in adult men.
The three-dimensional solid-state structures of two modifications of doxazosin mesylate (C23H26N5O5)+.(CH3SO3)-, 4-amino-2-[4-[(2,3-dihydro-1,4-benzodioxin-2-yl)carbonyl]piperazin-1-yl]-6,7-dimethoxyquinazoline methanesulfonate, a commonly used antihypertensive agent, have been determined by synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction. An anhydrous form (A) and a dihydrate form (dG) crystallize in monoclinic space groups. In both forms the doxazosin molecule is protonated at the N1 atom of the quinazoline bicycle. The N1 atom, and the amino H atoms and O atoms of the mesylate moieties are involved in three-dimensional hydrogen-bonding networks, while solvent water molecules and carboxamide O atoms are also incorporated in a hydrogen-bonding network in dG.
PURPOSE: Hydralazine, doxazosin, and verapamil are currently recommended by the Endocrine Society as acceptable bridging treatment in those in whom full cessation of antihypertensive medication is infeasible during screening for primary aldosteronism (PA). This is under the assumption that they cause minimal to no effect on the aldosterone-to-renin ratio, the most widely used screening test for PA. However, limited evidence is available regarding the effects of these particular drugs on said ratio. METHODS: In the present study, we retrospectively assessed the changes in aldosterone, renin, and aldosterone-to-renin values in essential hypertensive participants before and after treatment with either hydralazine (n = 26) or doxazosin (n = 20) or verapamil (n = 15). All samples were taken under highly standardized conditions. RESULTS: Hydralazine resulted in a borderline significant rise in active plasma renin concentration (19 vs 25 mIU/L, p = 0.067) and a significant fall in the aldosterone-to-renin ratio (38 vs 24, p = 0.017). Doxazosin caused declines in both plasma aldosterone concentration (470 vs 330 pmol/L, p = 0.028) and the aldosterone-to-renin ratio (30 vs 20, p = 0.020). With respect to verapamil, we found no statistically significant effect on any of these outcome variables. CONCLUSION: We conclude that the assumption that these drugs can be used with little consequence to the aldosterone-to-renin cannot be substantiated. While it is possible that they are indeed the best option when full antihypertensive drug cessation is infeasible, the potential effects of these drugs must still be taken into account when interpreting the aldosterone-to-renin ratio.
Preclinical findings support a role for alpha1-adrenergic antagonists in reducing nicotine-motivated behaviors, but these findings have yet to be translated to humans. The current study evaluated whether doxazosin would attenuate stress-precipitated smoking in the human laboratory. Using a well-validated laboratory analogue of smoking-lapse behavior, this pilot study evaluated whether doxazosin (4 and 8 mg/day) versus placebo attenuated the effect of stress (vs neutral imagery) on tobacco craving, the ability to resist smoking and subsequent ad-libitum smoking in nicotine-deprived smokers ( n=35). Cortisol, adrenocorticotropin, norepinephrine, epinephrine, and physiologic reactivity were assessed. Doxazosin (4 and 8 mg/day vs placebo) decreased cigarettes per day during the 21-day titration period. Following titration, doxazosin (4 and 8 mg/day vs placebo) decreased tobacco craving. During the laboratory session, doxazosin (8 mg/day vs placebo) further decreased tobacco craving following stress versus neutral imagery. Doxazosin increased the latency to start smoking following stress, and reduced the number of cigarettes smoked. Dosage of 8 mg/day doxazosin increased or normalized cortisol levels following stress imagery and decreased cortisol levels following neutral imagery. These preliminary findings support a role for the noradrenergic system in stress-precipitated smoking behavior, and support further development of doxazosin as a novel pharmacotherapeutic treatment strategy for smoking cessation.
PURPOSE: Alpha-blockers have been proven as an effective method for increasing the stone expulsion rate of distal ureteral stones. Limited studies have focused on doxazosin; its efficacy remained unclear. We performed this meta-analysis to investigate the efficacy and safety of doxazosin for patients diagnosed with distal ureteral stones less than 10mm. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We systematically searched Ovid MEDLINE(R), Cochrane Library, EMBASE, and PubMed for articles comparing doxazosin and conventional care or tamsulosin for distal ureteral stones through October 2019. The outcome measures were stone expulsive rate (SER), stone expulsive time (SET), pain episodes, analgesics consumption, and adverse events. RESULTS: We included 12 studies involving 836 participants with distal ureteral stones less than 10mm in our review. The present meta-analysis showed doxazosin could significantly increase SER [RR=1.64,95%CI (1.32, 2.04), P < 0.00001], shorten SET [WMD=-3.97,95% CI (-5.68, -2.27), P  < 0.00001] compared with conventional care. In the subgroup analyses, doxazosin showed no benefit in the children subgroup (<16 years old) [RR=1.63,95% CI (0.73,3.64), P  =0.23]. No statistically significant difference was observed regarding the effectiveness of doxazosin and tamsulosin in SER, SET, and safety. 9 in 286 participants reported doxazosin-related adverse events; most were mild to moderate. CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis may suggest that doxazosin is a safe and effective MET for distal ureteral stones less than 10mm. It is not demonstrated to have any significant difference with tamsulosin in SER, SET, and safety. However, it showed no benefits for patients<16 years old.
Doxazosin, a selective alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonist, is an established first-line antihypertensive agent that is being introduced for the management of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Hypertension and benign prostatic hyperplasia are linked by the sympathetic nervous system, which has an aetiologic role in both conditions. The alpha 1-adrenoceptor is a mediator of increased tension, both in vascular and prostatic smooth muscle. Studies have shown that doxazosin, through its balanced action on alpha 1-adrenoceptor subtypes, reduces blood pressure and improves other risk factors for coronary heart disease, such as lipid profile, insulin sensitivity, left ventricular hypertrophy, platelet aggregation and fibrinolysis. Data are now accumulating to show that doxazosin improves urinary flow rates and symptoms in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. These effects have been demonstrated in controlled clinical studies, within weeks, and long term. Since hypertension and benign prostatic hyperplasia are widespread and often undiagnosed in the community, particularly with increasing age, doxazosin may be a particularly appropriate therapy for the considerable number of older men with both conditions.
The prevalence of benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) and erectile dysfunction (ED) both increase with age, and increasing evidence suggests a common cause rather than independent age-related changes. Arterial hypertension often accompanies these urological disorders, suggesting the possibility that increased alpha-adrenoceptor activity may be causal in all three conditions. As evidence for this model, alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists such as doxazosin produce therapeutically beneficial effects in lowering blood pressure, reducing prostate growth and BPH symptoms, and relieving ED. At postjunctional alpha(1)-receptors in the corpus cavernosa, noradrenaline causes vascular smooth muscle cell contraction, restricting blood flow, resulting in penile detumescence. Just as alpha-adrenoceptor antagonism results in systemic vasorelaxation to lower blood pressure, the same mechanism in the penis modulates the effects of noradrenaline to favour vasodilatation, resulting in improved erectile function. Increasing clinical evidence attests to the effectiveness of doxazosin in relieving ED, even in patients refractory to ED-specific treatment, as well as in reducing BPH symptoms and elevated blood pressure.
A number of medical conditions are identified as risk factors for suicide death; in particular, cardiovascular illnesses are recognized as a major suicide risk factor. In this case, self-poisoning is the common method of suicide and cardiovascular drugs are among the major medications associated with fatal overdose, with calcium channel blockers being one of the most common agents. The present study describes two different fatal suicide cases involving four cardiovascular drugs: carvedilol, doxazosin and amlodipine (case 1) and diltiazem (case 2). The concentrations of the target cardiovascular drugs in the different biological specimens (central and femoral blood, urine, liver, brain) are presented, giving information about the potentially fatal data and the distribution of the drugs in the body. The study led to the implementation of a fast, sensitive and simple method for the detection and quantification of the four commonly prescribed cardiovascular drugs in post-mortem specimens including fluids and tissues for forensic purposes. The method was fully validated. The toxicological results of the studied cases are discussed, along with the autopsy results, histopathological evidence, and circumstances of death. The toxicological findings presented in the study provide new data regarding cardiovascular drugs in different post-mortem specimens, which will contribute to the currently limited knowledge about the toxicological profile of cardiovascular drugs and their distribution.
BACKGROUND: Alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonists (alpha1-blockers) are first-line drugs for the treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms associated with benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH). Doxazosin gastrointestinal therapeutic system (GITS) and tamsulosin belong to the 2 most frequently prescribed alpha1-blockers. This systematic review and meta-analysis was performed to compare the efficacy and tolerability of these 2 alpha1-blockers. METHODS: A systematic review of published randomized controlled trials in English or Chinese language was performed using the PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, CNKI, Wanfang, and Vip databases. After data extraction and quality assessment, the meta-analysis was performed to compare clinical parameters (International Prostate Symptom Score [IPSS] total [IPSS-T], storage [IPSS-S], voiding [IPSS-V], maximum urine flow [Qmax], and postvoid residual) and adverse events (AEs) that changed after first drug intake. RESULTS: After the screening, 8 eligible randomized controlled trials with 1316 patients were identified. Doxazosin-GITS showed a significantly higher efficacy compared with tamsulosin (IPSS-T P < .001, IPSS-S P < .001, and IPSS-V P < .001). There were no significant differences between the 2 drugs for changes in Qmax (P = .477) or postvoid residual (P = .739). The overall AEs were significantly lower in the doxazosin-GITS group (risk ratio: 0.77; 95% CI: 0.54-1.08; P = .036). However, dizziness (P = .387), headache (P = .745), asthenia (P = .693), postural hypotension (P = .114), and retrograde ejaculation (P = .187) were similar between the 2 groups. CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis indicates that doxazosin-GITS has significantly higher efficacy and lower AEs than tamsulosin in patients with lower urinary tract symptoms/benign prostate hyperplasia.
ERalpha and Wnt/beta-catenin pathways are critical for the progression of most endometrial cancers. We aimed to investigate the cytotoxic and apoptotic effects of tamoxifen and quinazoline derivative drugs of doxazosin and erlotinib, and their roles in ERalpha and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathways in human endometrial cancer RL 95-2 cell. 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay and xCELLigence systems were performed to evaluate cytotoxicity. Furthermore, apoptotic induction was tested by Annexin V analysis. Caspase-3 and -9 activity and changes in the mitochondrial membrane potential were evaluated. The level of reactive oxygen species was measured by incubating with dichlorofluorescein diacetate. Protein ratios of p-ERalpha/ERalpha, GSK3beta/p-GSK3beta, and p-beta-catenin/beta-catenin and expression levels of ESR1, EGFR, c-Myc genes were evaluated to elucidate mechanisms in signaling pathways. We found that the tested drugs showed cytotoxic and apoptotic effects in the cells. Doxazosin significantly reduced ESR1 expression, slightly reduced the p-beta-catenin/beta-catenin ratio and c-Myc expression. Erlotinib significantly increased c-Myc expression while significantly decreasing the p-beta-catenin/beta-catenin and p-ERalpha/ERalpha ratio, and ESR1 expression. However, we observed that the cells develop resistance to erlotinib over a certain concentration, suggesting that ERalpha, ESR1, EGFR, and c-Myc may be a new target for overcoming drug resistance in the treatment of endometrial cancer. We also observed that erlotinib and doxazosin play an important role in the ERalpha signaling pathway and can act as potent inhibitors of PKA and/or tyrosine kinase in the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway in RL 95-2 cell. In conclusion, doxazosin and erlotinib may have a possible therapeutic potential in human endometrial cancer.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the current study was to evaluate the effect of alpha blockers on the cardiac outcomes of hypertensive patients who underwent myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI). METHODS: A retrospective analysis of the nuclear cardiology laboratory database was performed. The study group included only hypertensive patients (n = 19 ,495). The cohort was divided into three groups - a reference group of no alpha-blocker therapy (n = 17 ,053), alpha blockers for benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) (n = 1164), and doxazosin for hypertension (HTN) (n = 1258). We used Cox proportional regression models to examine the patient cardiac outcomes (composite of cardiovascular mortality and myocardial infarction) adjusted for the myocardial perfusion study results. The mean age was 65 +/- 11.1 years, 55% were men, and the average follow-up was 79.2 +/- 37.3 months. RESULTS: In univariate analysis, the doxazosin for HTN group had the highest rate of adverse cardiac events in comparison to the BPH and reference groups (14.1 vs. 11.3% and 8.9%, respectively, P < 0.001). After stratifying for the degree of reversibility of perfusion defect, only individuals with a moderate-to-severe perfusion defect in the doxazosin for HTN group had a significant increase in adverse cardiac events [hazard ratio 1.50 95% confidence interval (1.14-1.98)]. CONCLUSION: Our data show that doxazosin treatment for HTN is associated with adverse cardiac outcome only among patients with moderate-to-severe ischemia on myocardial perfusion imaging. Doxazosin and other alpha blockers appear to be safe in the vast majority of patients with a lesser degree of ischemia.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and alcohol use disorders (AUD) are two of the most common mental health disorders affecting civilians as well as military populations. If left untreated, individuals with co-occurring PTSD/AUD are at increased risk for developing other mental health problems (e.g., depression, anxiety), physical health problems, reduced resiliency and military readiness, and vocational and social impairment. Substantial gaps in the treatment of co-occurring PTSD/AUD exist and there is a critical need to develop more effective pharmacological treatments. The current study addresses this gap in the literature by testing the efficacy and safety of doxazosin, a long-acting and selective alpha-1 adrenergic antagonist, as compared to placebo in reducing PTSD and AUD severity among U.S. military veterans. Noradrenergic dysregulation has been implicated in the development and maintenance of PTSD and AUD, and pilot studies examining doxazosin in PTSD-only or AUD-only samples have shown promise. This is the first study, however, to evaluate doxazosin in a comorbid PTSD/AUD sample. This paper describes the rationale, design and methodology of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of doxazosin (16 mg/day) delivered over 12 weeks among military veterans with current PTSD and AUD. In addition, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is applied at pre- and post-treatment to investigate the underlying pathophysiology of comorbid PTSD/AUD and identify prognostic indicators of treatment outcome. This study is designed to accelerate research on co-occurring PTSD/AUD and provide empirical evidence to inform clinical practice.
OBJECTIVE: To examine (1) the relative therapeutic equivalence of 4 mg doxazosin gastrointestinal therapeutic system (DOX GITS) and 4 mg doxazosin standard (DOX-S4) and (2) the efficacy and safety of 4 mg DOX GITS versus 2 mg doxazosin standard (DOX-S2). PATIENTS: Male or female patients aged 18-80 diagnosed with mild-to-moderate essential hypertension (sitting diastolic blood pressure (DBP) 95-110 mmHg and systolic blood pressure (SBP) < 180 mmHg) were randomized into the study. METHODS: This double-blind, parallel, 9-week trial compared DOX-GITS with doxazosin standard (DOX-S) in 310 hypertensive patients. Following a 2-week placebo run-in phase, patients were randomized to receive DOX-GITS at 4 mg/d or DOX-S at 2 or 4 mg/d. DOX GITS dosage remained unchanged at 4 mg throughout the study. Titration in the DOX-S groups was initiated at Week 0 with 1 mg DOX-S and increased to 2 mg DOX-S at Week 1. Dosage in the DOX-S4 group was increased to 4 mg DOX-S at Week 3. Therapeutic equivalence was measured by the change from baseline in sitting diastolic BP (DBP). Efficacy was assessed using the change from baseline for all blood pressure measures. Safety analysis included evaluation of laboratory tests at clinic visits and adverse events (AEs). RESULTS: Therapeutic equivalences between DOX GITS and DOX-S4 and DOX-S2 were established at all study visits except for a significant difference in favor of DOX GITS at Week 1 (p = 0.019) when the dose of DOX-S was 1 mg. All groups had a significant decrease in BP at all study visits compared with baseline. The proportion of patients who reached goal sitting DBP (< 90 mmHg) was similar among the three treatment groups, except at Week 1, when more patients in the DOX GITS group had obtained the goal compared with those in the DOX-S2 group (40.6% vs. 22.3%; p = 0.005). The proportion of patients who reached sitting SBP (< 140 mmHg) goal was similar among groups. AE profiles among the groups were similar. CONCLUSION: DOX GITS was as effective as DOX-S in patients with mild-to-moderate hypertension. The improved pharmacokinetic profile of the GITS formulation compared with the standard formulation allows a therapeutic dose to be delivered earlier and without dose titration. Both formulations of doxazosin were well tolerated.
PURPOSE: No conclusion exists for the optimum duration of preoperative administration of doxazosin (DOX) before adrenalectomy for pheochromocytoma. The purpose of this study is to investigate whether perioperative hemodynamics and postoperative outcomes are related to the duration of DOX administration. METHODS: In total, 132 patients managed preoperatively with single alpha-receptor blocker DOX were enrolled. All patients underwent adrenalectomy for pheochromocytoma in the Department of Urology, Peking University First Hospital, between January 2001 and July 2019. Patients were divided into three groups based on the duration of preoperative administration of DOX: group A (</=14 days), group B (15-30 days), and group C (>30 days). Patient and tumor characteristics, intraoperative hemodynamics, and postoperative outcomes were recorded and compared. RESULTS: These patients included 57 men and 75 women, with an average age of 48 years. Clinical characteristics, preoperative hemodynamics, medicine management and surgical approaches were comparable between the three groups. Among the three groups, we found that group C (>30 days) had the lowest intraoperative minimum heart rate [group A vs. group B vs. group C = 60 (52-67) vs. 59 (50-61) vs. 51.5 (50-58.75), p = 0.024] and highest risk of postoperative hypotension requiring vasopressor support [group A vs. group B vs. group C = 14 (20.3%) vs. 12 (27.9%) vs. 10 (50.0%), p = 0.032]. CONCLUSION: The current study indicated that preoperative management of pheochromocytoma with single alpha-receptor blocker DOX for more than 30 days after final dose adjustment might lead to intraoperative bradycardia and more postoperative hypotension requiring vasopressor support. Thus, our study does not support long-term (over 30 days) preoperative administration of pheochromocytoma with single alpha-receptor blocker DOX in the final dose.
