INTRODUCTION: Duloxetine has previously been reported to be promising in the setting of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN). The aim of this study was to conduct a comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis, on the use of duloxetine in prevention and treatment of CIPN. METHODS: PubMed, Embase and Cochrane CENTRAL were searched from database inception up until April 2022. Articles were included in this review if they reported on duloxetine use in the setting of CIPN, in a multiarm comparative human trial. A random effects DerSimonian-Laird model was used to calculate summary risk ratios (RR) and corresponding 95% CIs, comparing duloxetine to placebo. This review was registered on. RESULTS: Seven randomised controlled trials that included 645 patients were identified. Five reported on duloxetine for treatment of CIPN, and two for prevention of CIPN. Two studies had some concern for bias. Duloxetine was statistically similar to placebo in its efficacy, both in the treatment (RR 0.92, 95% CI 0.84 to 1.01) and prevention (RR 1.02, 95% CI 0.87 to 1.19) of CIPN. Safety profile was similar, in the treatment (RR 1.31, 95% CI 0.90 to 1.89) and prevention (RR 1.52, 95% CI 0.98 to 2.38) setting. CONCLUSION: There is currently limited evidence supporting duloxetine's use for CIPN. There is a need for more comprehensive and higher-quality trials assessing duloxetine in the setting of CIPN, before further clinical practice recommendations. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: PROSPERO (CRD42022327487).
BACKGROUND: Duloxetine and pregabalin are among the most widely used medications in the treatment of patients with fibromyalgia syndrome (FM). OBJECTIVES: To add to the very few lines of evidence that exist on the comparative safety and efficacy of these two medications. METHODS: In this open-label randomized clinical trial, outpatient women, who were diagnosed with FM based on American College of Rheumatology 2010 criteria, and had an age range of 18-65 years old were assigned to either duloxetine 30-60 mg or pregabalin 75-150 mg per day for 4 weeks. Patients were excluded in cases of having used duloxetine, pregabalin, gabapentin, or antidepressants within 12 weeks prior to the study, having had a history of comorbid medical conditions that could provoke chronic pain, or having had comorbid neuropsychiatric disorders, except for major depressive/anxiety disorders. Primary outcomes were between-group differences in mean score changes from baseline to end point for Widespread Pain Index (WPI) and Beck Depression Inventory-II. Secondary outcomes were the same statistical estimates, but for Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire-Revised and 12-Item Short Form Survey. Descriptive statistics and independent samples t-test were the main methods of analysis. ( www.irct.ir ; IRCT2016030626935N1). RESULTS: Among all the scales, only WPI scores improved with a statistically significant difference between the two treatment arms, favoring duloxetine (Mean difference in score change - 2.32, 95% CI, -4.46 to - 0.18; p = 0.034; Cohen's d 0.53 95% CI, 0.04 to 1.02). Drop out rate and cumulative incidence of nausea was significantly higher in the duloxetine arm compared to the pregabalin arm. CONCLUSION: This study provides further evidence on higher efficacy of duloxetine compared to pregabalin for the treatment of pain in patients with fibromyalgia. Future comprehensive pragmatic clinical trials are warranted.
Authors report on an interesting case of a teenager with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and comorbid generalized anxiety disorder, who developed takotsubo cardiomyopathy subsequent to pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions between atomoxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, and the antidepressant duloxetine. Clinicians should be mindful of the potential for cardiovascular adverse effects when prescribing agents that target noradrenergic receptors.
About 21% of adults with osteoarthritis (OA) are diagnosed with concomitant depression in addition to chronic pain. Duloxetine, an anti-depressant medication, has been recently approved for managing Knee OA. We performed a systematic review to ascertain the efficacy and safety of duloxetine for OA. We searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of Science, Google Scholar, and the Cochrane Database from inception to December 2018. Randomized clinical trials (RCTs) assessing the efficacy and/or safety of duloxetine versus placebo in OA patients were included. Data extraction and quality assessment were undertaken by two independent reviewers. Seven RCTs (n = 2,102 participants) met our inclusion criteria, and five RCTs (n = 1,713) were eligible for meta-analysis. The results of our analyses indicate that duloxetine has statistically significant, moderate benefits on pain, function, and quality of life in knee OA patients for up to 13 weeks. Reported incidences of gastrointestinal adverse events were three to four times higher in participants who received duloxetine versus placebo. Duloxetine may be an effective treatment option for individuals with knee OA, but use of the drug is associated with a significantly higher risk of adverse events. Patient preferences and clinicians' judgment must be considered before the initiation of duloxetine.
BACKGROUND: Chronic musculoskeletal pain (CMP) is a complex condition that is mainly treated with analgesic drugs. However, antidepressant intervention is also an important factor in the treatment of CMP. Duloxetine is an effective treatment option for patients with CMP as its antidepressant effect. The purpose of this article is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of duloxetine in treating CMP. DATABASES AND DATA TREATMENT: We searched PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, Cochrane Library from inception to May, 2022. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating the efficacy and safety of duloxetine versus placebo in patients with CMP were included. We identified 13 articles and studied a population of 4201 participants in 4 countries. RESULTS: This meta-analysis showed that the duloxetine has statistically significant compared with the placebo control, benefits on 24-hour average pain, living quality, physical function, and global impressions and there was no difference in the incidence of serious adverse event. In general, duloxetine can improve mood and pain level at the same time. CONCLUSIONS: This review shows a significant contribution of duloxetine to CMP symptom relief. This meta-analysis improved that duloxetine can significantly reduce the pain level of patients, improve depressive symptoms and global impression, and has no obvious serious adverse reactions. However, additional studies are required to confirm the relationship between psychological diseases and chronic pain and explore their internal links.
Duloxetine has been increasingly administered, but the associated cardiovascular adverse event risk is not clearly understood. Therefore, we identified the association between duloxetine and cardiovascular adverse events through an analysis of heart rate and blood pressure change. We searched PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, ClinicalTrials.gov, and psycINFO in June 2019. The title, abstract, and full text were checked in order to obtain articles. A meta-analysis was conducted with random effect model and quality of articles was evaluated using Cochrane Risk of Bias 2.0. The manuscript has been written according to the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses) harm checklist. A total of 4009 studies were screened by the title and abstract. After reviewing 186 full texts, 17 studies were finally selected for the meta-analysis. Nine of the 17 studied duloxetine given for mood disorders and 8 for pain control. The duration of 14 studies was under 13 weeks. Cardiovascular adverse events (hypertension, myocardial infarction, transient ischemic attack, tachycardia atrial fibrillation, and cerebrovascular accident) were reported. The meta-analysis demonstrated that duloxetine increased heart rate by 2.22 beats/min (95% confidence intervals [CIs]: 1.53, 2.91) and diastolic blood pressure by 0.82 mmHg (95% CI: 0.17, 1.47). Our findings may be the signal for the safety of cardiovascular disease for short-term use of duloxetine. Well-designed pharmaco-epidemiological studies evaluating the causal relationship between long-term use of duloxetine and cardiovascular disease is still necessary.
OBJECTIVES: Fibromyalgia (FM) is characterised by a form of debilitating pain that is unresponsive to standard analgesics. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of supplementing ongoing pregabalin (PGB) and duloxetine (DLX) treatment with palmitoylethanolamide (PEA) and acetyl-L-carnitine (ALC) for 24 weeks in FM patients. METHODS: After undergoing three months of stable treatment with DLX+PGB, FM patients were randomised to continue the same treatment (Group 1) or to add PEA 600 mg b.i.d + ALC 500 mg b.i.d. (Group 2) for a further 12 weeks. Every two weeks throughout the study, cumulative disease severity was estimated using the Widespread Pain Index (WPI) as the primary outcome measure; the secondary outcomes were the fortnightly scores of the patient-completed revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQR) and the modified Fibromyalgia Assessment Status (FASmod) questionnaire. All three measures were expressed as time-integrated area under the curve (AUC) values. RESULTS: One hundred and thirty (91.5%) of the initial 142 FM patients completed the study: 68 patients in Group 1 and 62 in Group 2. Twenty-four weeks after randomisation, the Group 2 patients showed additional significant improvements in all three outcome measures. Although there was some fluctuation in both groups during the study period, the AUC values of the WPI scores steadily decreased in Group 2 (p=0.048), which also showed better outcomes in terms of the AUC values of the FIQR (p=0.033) and FASmod scores (p=0.017). CONCLUSIONS: This is the first randomised controlled study demonstrating the effectiveness of the adding on therapy of PEA+ALC to DLX+PGB in FM patients.
Background: Treatment of neuropathic pain is challenging. Pregabalin and duloxetine are used as first-line therapy. Various international guidelines recommend a combination of first-line agents for the management of neuropathic pain. The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a fixed-dose combination (FDC) of low-dose pregabalin and duloxetine compared to pregabalin monotherapy at week 7 in patients with moderate to severe neuropathic pain. Methods: This was a phase 3, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy parallel-group non-inferiority study conducted at 17 sites across India. Three hundred and twenty-eight adult patients with moderate to severe neuropathic pain were randomized in a ratio of 1:1 to receive a FDC of pregabalin and duloxetine or pregabalin monotherapy for 7 weeks followed by a one-week follow-up. The pregabalin-duloxetine combination was initiated at 50 plus 20 mg per day and gradually titrated to a maximum of 75mg plus 30mg twice daily. Pregabalin was initiated at 75mg/day and gradually titrated to a maximum of 150mg twice daily. The main efficacy outcome was a mean change in pain intensity at the end of 7 weeks. Results: Two hundred and ninety-eight patients completed the study, 148 in the pregabalin-duloxetine group and 150 in the pregabalin group. The mean change in daily pain at 7 weeks was as follows: -4.49 with FDC and -4.66 with pregabalin (p<0.0001). The non-inferiority of a low-dose FDC compared to pregabalin monotherapy was demonstrated at the end of the study. The incidence of dizziness and somnolence was comparable between both treatments. A higher frequency of peripheral oedema was observed with pregabalin monotherapy than in the FDC group (p>0.05). Conclusions: A FDC of low doses of pregabalin and duloxetine and high dose of pregabalin monotherapy achieved similar analgesia with dizziness, and somnolence as the most frequent adverse event. Trial registration: CTRI/2020/09/027555.
We report efficient, catalytic, asymmetric total syntheses of both (R)-fluoxetine and (S)-duloxetine from alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehydes conducting five sequential one-pot steps (imine formation/copper mediated beta-borylation/transimination/reduction/oxidation) followed by the specific ether group formation which deliver the desired products (R)-fluoxetine in 45% yield (96% ee) and (S)-duloxetine in 47% yield (94% ee).
The synthesis of (R)-duloxetine is described. Dynamic kinetic resolution of beta-hydroxynitrile rac-1 using Candida antarctica lipase B (CALB, N435) and ruthenium catalyst 6 afforded beta-cyano acetate (R)-2 in high yield and in excellent enantioselectivity (98% ee). The subsequent synthetic steps were straightforward and (R)-duloxetine was isolated in 37% overall yield over 6 steps. The synthetic route also constitute a formal total synthesis of (S)-duloxetine.
PURPOSE: There is no consensus in the current literature on the analgesic role of duloxetine after total hip arthroplasty (THA) or total knee arthroplasty (TKA). Thus, we designed this meta-analysis to reveal the analgesic effectiveness and safety of duloxetine in TKA or THA. METHODS: As of October 2022, two authors (L.C. and W.Q.J.) independently searched five main databases (EMBASE, Web of Science, PubMed, Cochrane Library, and Google Scholar) to find relevant studies. Duloxetine vs. placebo in randomized controlled trials (RCTs) for THA or TKA were included. We set perioperative total opioid consumption as the primary outcome. Secondary outcomes included resting or dynamic pain scores over time, gastrointestinal adverse events, neurological adverse events, and other adverse reactions. RESULTS: Eight RCTs with 695 patients were incorporated in our study. This meta-analysis showed high evidence that duloxetine was effective in reducing perioperative opioid consumption (Standard mean difference [SMD] = - 0.50, 95% confidence intervals [CI]: -0.70 to - 0.31, P < 0.00001) and low to moderate evidence that duloxetine could reduce pain within three weeks after surgery. Low to high evidence showed no differences between the two groups for most adverse events. Substantial evidence suggests that duloxetine can reduce nausea and vomiting after surgery (Risk ratio [RR] = 0.69, 95% CI: 0.50 to 0.95, P = 0.02, I(2) = 4%). However, moderate evidence suggested that duloxetine might be associated with increased postoperative drowsiness (RR = 1.83, 95% CI: 1.08 to 3.09, P = 0.02, I(2) = 0%). CONCLUSION: Duloxetine reduced overall opioid consumption in the perioperative period and relieved pain within three weeks after surgery without increasing the risk of adverse drug events. Duloxetine can be part of a multimodal management regimen in patients with THA and TKA.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the risk of adverse maternal and infant outcomes following in utero exposure to duloxetine. DESIGN: Cohort study nested in the Medicaid Analytic eXtract for 2004-13. SETTING: Publicly insured pregnancies in the United States. PARTICIPANTS: Pregnant women 18 to 55 years of age and their liveborn infants. INTERVENTIONS: Duloxetine exposure during the etiologically relevant time window, compared with no exposure to duloxetine, exposure to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, exposure to venlafaxine, and exposure to duloxetine before but not during pregnancy. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Congenital malformations overall, cardiac malformations, preterm birth, small for gestational age infant, pre-eclampsia, and postpartum hemorrhage. RESULTS: Cohort sizes ranged from 1.3 to 4.1 million, depending on the outcome. The number of women exposed to duloxetine varied by cohort and exposure contrast and was around 2500-3000 for early pregnancy exposure and 900-950 for late pregnancy exposure. The base risk per 1000 unexposed women was 36.6 (95% confidence interval 36.3 to 36.9) for congenital malformations overall, 13.7 (13.5 to 13.9) for cardiovascular malformations, 107.8 (107.3 to 108.3) for preterm birth, 20.4 (20.1 to 20.6) for small for gestational age infant, 33.6 (33.3 to 33.9) for pre-eclampsia, and 23.3 (23.1 to 23.4) for postpartum hemorrhage. After adjustment for measured potential confounding variables, all baseline characteristics were well balanced for all exposure contrasts. In propensity score adjusted analyses versus unexposed pregnancies, the relative risk was 1.11 (95% confidence interval 0.93 to 1.33) for congenital malformations overall and 1.29 (0.99 to 1.68) for cardiovascular malformations. For preterm birth, the relative risk was 1.01 (0.92 to 1.10) for early exposure and 1.19 (1.04 to 1.37) for late exposure. For small for gestational age infants the relative risks were 1.14 (0.92 to 1.41) and 1.20 (0.83 to 1.72) for early and late pregnancy exposure, respectively, and for pre-eclampsia they were 1.12 (0.96 to 1.31) and 1.04 (0.80 to 1.35). The relative risk for postpartum hemorrhage was 1.53 (1.08 to 2.18). Results from sensitivity analyses were generally consistent with the findings from the main analyses. CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of the evidence available to date, duloxetine is unlikely to be a major teratogen but may be associated with an increased risk of postpartum hemorrhage and a small increased risk of cardiac malformations. While continuing to monitor the safety of duloxetine as data accumulate over time, these potential small increases in risk of relatively uncommon outcomes must be weighed against the benefits of treating depression and pain during pregnancy in a given patient. TRIAL REGISTRATION: EUPAS 15946.
BACKGROUND: Previous clinical trials indicated that duloxetine may be effective in the treatment of osteoarthritis (OA) pain. This meta-analysis is conducted to evaluate short term analgesic effect and safety of duloxetine in the treatment of OA. METHODS: Electronic databases were searched in February 2019, including PUBMED, EMBASE, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Web of Science. All eligible studies should be randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing duloxetine treatment group to placebo about OA pain relief and safety outcomes. RESULTS: Five RCTs with 2059 patients were involved in this systematic review and meta-analysis. Compared to placebo, duloxetine treatment showed significant better result, with higher reduction pain intensity (mean difference [MD] = -0.77, P < .00001), higher rates of both 30% and 50% reduction in pain severity (risk ratio [RR] = 1.42, P < .00001; RR = 1.62, P < .00001), lower mean Patient Global Improvement-Inventory (PGI-I) score (MD = -0.48, P < .00001). The results of the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities (WOMAC) score change from baseline to endpoint also favored duloxetine treatment group in all four categories, including total (MD = -5.43, P < .00001), pain (MD = -1.63, P = .001), physical function (MD = -4.22, P < .00001), and stiffness score (MD = -0.58, P < .00001). There were higher rates of treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) (RR = 1.32, P < .00001) and discontinuation (RR = 1.88, P < .00001) in duloxetine group. However, there was no significant difference in the incidence of severe adverse events (SAEs) between these 2 groups (RR = 0.84, P = .68). CONCLUSION: Duloxetine was an effective and safe choice to improve pain and functional outcome in OA patients. However, further studies are still needed to find out the optimal dosage for OA and examine its long-term efficacy and safety. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42019128862.
BACKGROUND: Duloxetine and amitriptyline are antidepressants used in the treatment of fibromyalgia. In published systematic reviews, there is no agreement about which drug is more effective and safer. This study aimed to compare evidence of the efficacy and safety of duloxetine compared with amitriptyline in the treatment of adult patients with fibromyalgia. This work contributes to guiding clinicians on the use of duloxetine or amitriptyline for the treatment of fibromyalgia and provides information for public health decision-makers. METHODS: Overview of systematic reviews of clinical trials comparing duloxetine and amitriptyline in the treatment of fibromyalgia. The reviews were screened in Cochrane, PubMed, EMBASE, and SRDR with no restrictions on language and year of publication, considering that the research was conducted in July 2018 and updated until May 2020. The selection was based on the following criteria: adult patients with a diagnosis of fibromyalgia treated with duloxetine or amitriptyline, comparing the efficacy and safety in pain, fatigue, sleep, and mood disorder symptoms and quality of life, in addition to the acceptability of these antidepressants. The methodological quality and strength of evidence were assessed using the AMSTAR and GRADE instruments. RESULTS: Eight systematic reviews were selected. Amitriptyline had low evidence for pain, moderate evidence for sleep and fatigue, and high evidence for quality of life. Duloxetine had high quality of evidence in patients with mood disorders. With low evidence, duloxetine has higher acceptability, but is safer in older patients, while amitriptyline is safer for non-elderly individuals. CONCLUSION: Both antidepressants are effective in the treatment of fibromyalgia, differing according to the patient's symptoms and profile. REGISTRATION: PROSPERO: CRD42019116101.
BACKGROUND: Knee osteoarthritis (OA) is a common form of arthritis in elders which can lead to reduced daily activity and quality of life. It is important to administer a proper treatment with high efficacy and low side effects. In this study, we evaluated the efficacy of co-treatment with oral duloxetine and intraarticular (IA) injection of hyaluronic acid (HA) and corticosteroid (CS) in patients with knee OA. OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to test the hypothesis that an IA injection of CS+HA combined with duloxetine could achieve pain management superior to that of an IA injection of CS+HA alone in patients experiencing knee OA related pain. STUDY DESIGN: This study adopted a prospective, randomized, open-label blind endpoint study design. SETTING: The investigation was performed at Beijing Tiantan Hospital Affiliated with the Capital Medical University from October 2019 to December 2021. The study plan was approved by the Ethics Committee of Beijing Tiantan Hospital (KY 2019-086-02). METHODS: A total of 150 patients were randomly allocated to receive either duloxetine combined with an IA injection (n = 75) or a single IA injection alone (n = 75). All patients were followed for 24 weeks. The primary outcome was the change in the weekly 24 hours average mean pain scores, and the secondary outcomes included the proportion of patients with >= 30% or >= 50% pain reduction, Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) items, Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) scores, Patient Global Impression Improvement (PGI-I) ratings, hospital anxiety and depression scale (HADS) scores and adverse events (AEs).. RESULTS: Patients in the experimental group had significantly greater improvement in the change of weekly mean of the 24 hours average pain scores, BPI pain severity ratings (P < 0.001) and WOMAC scores (P < 0.001) at the study endpoint. A significantly greater percentage of patients in the experimental group rated PGI-I of <= 2 (P = 0.021) and >= 50% pain reduction (P = 0.029) at 24 weeks. There was no difference in the proportion of patients with <= 30% pain reduction, the HADS scores or frequency of AEs between the 2 groups. LIMITATIONS: The effectiveness and safety were examined only up to 24 weeks after treatment, and we did not perform a long-term follow-up as most previous studies have. Optimum dosage of duloxetine, as well as different molecular-weight HA, should be investigated in future studies. CONCLUSION: Patients receiving co-treatment with oral duloxetine and IA (HA+CS) injections experienced considerable improvement in pain and knee function compared to those who received an IA injection alone.
BACKGROUND: Duloxetine, a serotonin-norepinephrine dual reuptake inhibitor, may improve analgesia after total joint arthroplasty (TJA). However, there is still no consensus on its effectiveness and safety. We conducted the meta-analysis to investigate the analgesic effect and safety of duloxetine for the treatment of patients received total knee or hip arthroplasty. METHODS: Pubmed, Cochrane Central Registry for Clinical Trials, Embase, OVID, Web of Science, and Google Scholar were searched using a predetermined search strategy from inception to September 21, 2022. Only randomized controlled trials of duloxetine in treatment of patients after total knee or hip arthroplasty were included. Data collection and extraction, quality assessment, and data analyses were performed according to the Cochrane standards. RESULTS: A total of 8 randomized controlled trials with 739 patients were included in the literature review of postoperative pain and adverse effects. The result of meta-analysis showed statistically significant lower opioid requirement with duloxetine (P < .05) for the different postoperative period. Duloxetine group had significant reductions in visual analog score for the 24-hour (walking: WMD = -0.98; 95% confidence interval [CI] = -1.69 to -0.26, P = .007; resting: WMD = -1.06; 95%CI = -1.85 to -0.27, P = .008) and 1-week (walking: WMD = -0.96; 95%CI = -1.42 to -0.50, P < .001; resting: WMD = -0.69; 95%CI = -1.22 to -0.16, P = .01); knee injury and osteoarthritis outcome score over 3-month (WMD = 2.94; 95%CI = -0.30 to 6.18, P = .008) and complication (odds ratio = 4.74; 95%CI = 0.23 to 96.56, P = .01) postoperative period compared with the control group. However, no difference on numeric rating scale (P > .05) for the different postoperative period; visual analog score (P > .05) for the 6-week or 3-month and knee injury and osteoarthritis outcome score (P > .05) for the 6-week postoperative period. Furthermore, it did not increase the incidence of adverse effects (odds ratio = 0.87; 95%CI = 0.72 to 1.05, P = .15). CONCLUSION: Duloxetine could decrease the opioids consumption and relieve early postoperative pain without increasing the risk of adverse medication effects in patients undergoing total knee or hip arthroplasty. Considering the ongoing opioid epidemic, duloxetine could act as a good supplement in multimodal pain management protocol for patients undergoing total joint arthroplasty.
Aim: Diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) induces chronic neuropathic pain in diabetic patients. Current treatments like pregabalin and duloxetine offer limited efficacy. This study evaluates combining pregabalin and duloxetine versus pregabalin alone for DPN pain relief, and explores gene modulation (PPARgamma and Akt) to understand neuropathic pain's molecular basis.Materials & methods: Diabetic patients with DPN were randomized into groups receiving combination therapy or pregabalin alone for 4 weeks. Pain intensity, gene expression and quality of life were assessed.Results: Combination therapy significantly reduced pain, improved quality of life and upregulated PPARgamma and Akt genes compared with monotherapy.Conclusion: Pregabalin and duloxetine combination therapy in DPN led to PPARgamma mRNA upregulation and negative correlation of Akt gene expression with pain scores. This combination therapy effectively reduced pain and improved quality of life.Clinical Trial Registration: CTRI/2021/02/031068.
Major depressive disorder is common among women in child-bearing age, and medical treatment is subject to substantial discussions and controversies. For Selective Serotonin reuptake inhibitors, SSRIs, a vast amount of data are available. For the newer antidepressant group of serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, SNRIs, significantly less data are available. Following the PRISMA guideline for systematic reviews, we performed a systematic search on the risk of major congenital malformations after first trimester in utero exposure to venlafaxine or duloxetine. We identified eight cohort studies reporting on the outcome upon in utero exposure to venlafaxine or duloxetine during the first trimester. The cumulated data for venlafaxine were 3186 exposed infants and 107 major malformations, resulting in a relative risk estimate and 95% confidence interval of 1.12 (0.92-1.35). The corresponding data for duloxetine were 668 infants and 16 major malformations, resulting in a relative risk estimate and 95% confidence interval of 0.80 (0.46-1.29). First-trimester in utero exposure to venlafaxine is not associated with an increased risk of major congenital malformations. The amount of data for duloxetine are significantly smaller but does not suggest a clinically important increased risk.
BACKGROUND: Painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy (PDPN) is a key concern in clinical practice. In this systematic review and meta-analysis, we compared duloxetine and placebo treatments in terms of their efficacy and safety in patients with PDPN. METHODS: Following the PRISMA guidelines, we searched the Cochrane Library, PubMed, and Embase databases for relevant English articles published before January 11, 2021. Treatment efficacy and safety were assessed in terms of pain improvement, patient-reported health-related performance, and patients' quality of life. RESULTS: We reviewed a total of 7 randomized controlled trials. Regarding pain improvement, duloxetine was more efficacious than placebo (mean difference [MD] - 0.89; 95% confidence interval [CI] - 1.09 to - 0.69; P < .00001). Furthermore, duloxetine significantly improved the patients' quality of life, which was assessed using the Clinical Global Impression severity subscale (MD - 0.48; 95% CI - 0.61 to - 0.36; P < .00001), Patient Global Impression of Improvement scale (MD - 0.50; 95% CI - 0.64 to - 0.37; P < .00001), and European Quality of Life Instrument 5D version (MD 0.04; 95% CI 0.02 to 0.07; P = .0002). Severe adverse events were rare, whereas nausea, somnolence, dizziness, fatigue, constipation, and decreased appetite were common; approximately, 12.6% of all patients dropped out because of the common symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: Duloxetine is more efficacious than placebo treatments in patients with PDPN. The rarity of severe adverse events indicates that duloxetine is safe. When a 60-mg dose is insufficient, 120 mg of duloxetine may improve PDPN symptoms. Our findings may help devise optimal treatment strategies for PDPN. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42021225451.
