OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine the inhibitory effect of eight antifungal drugs on S. mutans growth, biofilm formation and virulence factors. METHODS: The actions of antifungal drugs on S. mutans were determined by recovery plates and survival kinetic curves. Biofilms were observed by scanning electron microscopy and the viable cells were recovered on BHI plates, meanwhile biofilms were stained by BacLight live/dead kit to investigate the biofilm viability. Bacteria/extracellular polysaccharides staining assays were performed to determine the EPS production of S. mutans biofilms. Acidogenicity and acidurity of S. mutans were determined using pH drop and acid tolerance assays, and the expression of ldh gene was evaluated using qPCR. RESULTS: We found that clotrimazole (CTR) and econazole (ECO) showed antibacterial activities on S. mutans UA159 and S. mutans clinical isolates at 12.5 and 25mg/L, respectively. CTR and ECO could also inhibit S. mutans biofilm formation and reduce the viability of preformed biofilm. CTR and ECO affected the live/dead ratio and the EPS/bacteria ratio of S. mutans biofilms. CTR and ECO also inhibited the pH drop, lactate acid production, and acid tolerance. The abilities of CTR and ECO to inhibit S. mutans ldh expression were also confirmed. CONCLUSIONS: We found that two antifungal azoles, CTR and ECO, had the abilities to inhibit the growth and biofilm formation of S. mutans and more importantly, they could also inhibit the virulence factors of S. mutans.
Methods based on derivative UV spectrophotometry and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) have been developed for the selective determination of miconazole and econazole in pharmaceutical dosage forms. A solid-phase extraction (SPE) procedure using a diol column gave quantitative drug extraction from formulated creams and provided purified sample solutions suitable for assay by the derivative UV spectrophotometric and HPLC methods. The proposed methods gave comparable accurate results, whereas a conventional UV spectrophotometric method was found to be seriously affected by excipients.
Stability and toxicity studies for duloxetine and econazole were achieved using individual solutions and their mixtures. Stability of drugs racemates and enantiomers was investigated under abiotic and biotic conditions. Toxicity was evaluated for the first time on Spirodela polyrhiza. EC50 values were calculated for each individual drug and for their binary mixture. Real (not nominal) concentrations determined by Capillary Electrophoresis were employed in the calculations of toxicity parameters. The use of a 25 mM phosphate buffer (pH 3.0) with 1.5% S-beta-CD as chiral selector at a temperature of 30  degrees C and a separation voltage of -20 kV enabled the simultaneous enantiomeric separation of duloxetine and econazole in 7.5 min with enantiomeric resolutions of 7.9 and 6.5, respectively. For individual solutions, decay percentages under abiotic conditions were higher for duloxetine (80%) than for econazole (60%), while in presence of Spirodela polyrhiza they increased for duloxetine but not for econazole. Econazole showed the highest decay percentages under abiotic or biotic conditions (100%) in binary mixtures. EC50 values for duloxetine and econazole enabled to include both drugs within the group of very toxic compounds although econazole showed a higher toxicity than duloxetine and the binary mixture.
CONTEXT: Miconazole (MIZ) and econazole (ECZ) are clinically used as antifungal drugs. OBJECTIVE: The drug effect and binding property with transport protein human serum albumin of MIZ and ECZ were studied. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The antifungal efficiency was investigated by microdiluting drug solutions from 0 to 48 mumol L(-1) through microcalorimetry and voltammetry studies. Transmission electron microscopy was used for morphological observations of C. albicans. The interaction with HSA was studied by electrochemical methods, fluorescence spectrometry, electron microscopy, and molecular simulation. RESULTS: IC50 of MIZ and ECZ for C. albicans were obtained as 19.72 and 29.90 mumol L(-1). Binding constants of MIZ and ECZ with HSA of 2.36 x 10(4) L mol(-1) and 3.73 x 10(4) L mol(-1) were obtained. After adding MIZ solution of 12 and 40 mumol L(-1), the peak currents increased to 4.887 and 6.024 muA. The peak currents of C. albicans in the presence of 20 and 48 mumol L(-1) ECZ were 4.701 and 5.544 muA. The docking scores for MIZ and ECZ of the best binding conformation in site I and site II were 5.60, 4.79, 5.63, and 5.85. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Strong inhibition to the metabolism of C. albicans and destructive effect was proved for both drugs. The lower IC50, growth rate constant of C. albicans, and higher peak current, reveal stronger antifungal activity of MIZ. Both drugs show an efficient quenching effect to intrinsic fluorescence residues of protein. MIZ mainly binds on site I while ECZ on site II. Molecular modeling experiments give further insight of the binding mechanism.
Two analytical methodologies based on the combined use of hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin and two different amino acid-based chiral ionic liquids (tetrabutylammonium-L-lysine or tetrabutylammonium-L-glutamic acid) in electrokinetic chromatography were developed in this work to perform the enantioselective determination of econazole and sulconazole in pharmaceutical formulations. The influence of different experimental variables such as buffer concentration, applied voltage, nature and concentration of the ionic liquid, temperature and injection time, on the enantiomeric separation was investigated. The combination of hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin and tetrabutylammonium-L-lysine under the optimized conditions enabled to achieve the enantiomeric determination of both drugs with high enantiomeric resolution (3.5 for econazole and 2.4 for sulconazole). The analytical characteristics of the developed methodologies were evaluated in terms of linearity, precision, LOD, LOQ and recovery showing good performance for the determination of both drugs which were successfully quantitated in pharmaceutical formulations. This work reports the first analytical methodology enabling the enantiomeric determination of sulconazole in pharmaceutical formulations.
The in vitro activities of ACH-702 and other antimicrobials against 30 Nocardia brasiliensis isolates were tested. The MIC(50) (MIC for 50% of the strains tested) and MIC(90) values of ACH-702 were 0.125 and 0.5 microg/ml. The same values for econazole were 2 and 4 microg/ml. The MIC(50) and MIC(90) values of imipenem and meropenem were 64 and >64 microg/ml and 2 and 8 microg/ml, respectively; the addition of clavulanic acid to the carbapenems had no effect.
BACKGROUND: In many instances, a cutaneous fungal infection may exist concomitantly with bacterial involvement. In this study we compared the in vitro activity of three antifungal agents against the dermatophytes, yeasts and bacteria recovered most commonly from cutaneous mycoses and bacterial infections. METHODS: Using a microdilution method adapted from the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards (NCCLS), we determined the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of ciclopirox olamine, econazole nitrate and butenafine HCl against a panel of dermatophyte fungi and yeasts (n = 39) and bacterial isolates (n = 45). RESULTS: All three antifungals demonstrated comparable activity against the dermatophytes tested, with a MIC range of 0.03-0.25 micro g/ml for ciclopirox, < 0.001-0.25 micro g/ml for econazole and 0.03-0.25 micro g/ml for butenafine. For yeasts, ciclopirox showed activity against all isolates, with an MIC range of 0.001-0.25 micro g/ml, whereas econazole had a broader range of 0.125-> 0.5 micro g/ml. Butenafine displayed limited activity against the yeast Candida albicans and no activity against Malassezia furfur. For the antibacterial activity studies, ciclopirox demonstrated activity against all isolates tested with a range of 0.06-2 micro g/ml, while econazole showed activity against Gram-positive bacteria only, with a MIC range of 0.004-0.25 micro g/ml. Butenafine HCl had a limited activity against bacterial isolates tested, showing activity against beta-hemolytic Streptococcus Group A and Corynebacterium only. Neither econazole nitrate nor butenafine HCl demonstrated activity against any of the Gram-negative strains evaluated in this study. CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest that ciclopirox olamine has the broadest in vitro activity, in comparison to econazole and butenafine HCl, against bacteria, yeasts and bacteria. These findings may have implications in the use of these antimycotics in the treatment of mixed cutaneous infections where bacteria or yeasts are present in addition to dermatophytes.
