Many patients switch from efavirenz- to dolutegravir-based regimens. In a phase 1 dolutegravir-efavirenz interaction study, mean dolutegravir minimum concentration decreased by 60% and 85% among CYP2B6 normal and slow/intermediate metabolizers, respectively. Mean efavirenz half-life was 2.7 times greater in slow vs normal metabolizers. Slow metabolizers will experience more prolonged subtherapeutic dolutegravir concentrations.
Individuals with a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection are at higher risk of developing adverse drug reactions. Multiple drugs are usually prescribed to patients with HIV infection for preventing the replication of HIV and for the treatment of the associated opportunistic infections. We report here the first case of an HIV-1-infected patient who developed an exfoliative dermatitis induced by efavirenz, a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor. Physicians should be aware of the possible occurrence of efavirenz-induced skin eruptions from the start of antiviral treatment of HIV infection.
Treatment of HIV infection is typically carried out using a combination of at least three drugs. Efavirenz is a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor that acts by non-competitive inhibition of the viral enzyme. Efavirenz-based regimens have performed favorably compared with protease inhibitor-based therapies either in naive patients or as simplification strategies in pretreated subjects. Efavirenz is administered once-daily and its simple dosing schedule improves adherence to therapy allowing for durability of the virologic and clinical responses. In the case of viral rebound, K103N is the most commonly efavirenz-selected viral mutation. As non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors have a distinctive adverse-event profile, protease inhibitor-sparing regimens may reduce the risk of metabolic complications, insulin resistance and peripheral fat redistribution.
We describe a patient with acute renal failure and irreversible kidney damage after an overdose with the fixed dose combination of efavirenz/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine (Atripla). The acute kidney injury was most probably caused by tenofovir. Efavirenz and emtricitabine seemed relatively safe in overdose. The pharmacokinetics in overdose of all 3 drugs and the effect of hemodialysis on the tenofovir clearance were studied by measuring the plasma concentrations and by the use of clinical pharmacokinetic software.
Efavirenz (Sustiva((R))) is a first-generation non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) type 1 infection or to prevent the spread of HIV. In 1998, the FDA authorized efavirenz for the treatment of HIV-1 infection. Patients formerly required three 200 mg efavirenz capsules daily, which was rapidly updated to a 600 mg tablet that only required one tablet per day. However, when given 600 mg once daily, plasma efavirenz concentrations were linked not only to poor HIV suppression but also to toxicity. Clinical data suggested that the standard dose of efavirenz could be reduced without compromising its effectiveness, resulting in a reduction in side effects and making the drug more affordable. Therefore, ENCORE1 was performed to compare the efficiency and safeness of a reduced dose of efavirenz (400 mg) with the standard dose (600 mg) plus two NRTI in antiretroviral-naive HIV-infected individuals. Nowadays, due to the emergence of integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs), some consider that it is time to stop using efavirenz as a first-line treatment on a global scale, in the parts of the world where that is possible. Efavirenz has been a primary first-line antiviral drug for more than 15 years. However, at this moment, the best use for efavirenz could be for pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) and repurposing in medicine.
Here, we describe severe neuropsychiatric symptoms in an HIV-positive Asian man with extremely high efavirenz plasma levels while receiving standard treatment with efavirenz/tenofovir/emtricitabine fixed-dose regimen. Genetic examination revealed compound homozygosity for loss-of-function alleles of CYP2B6, including coding for a rare truncated protein. Neuropsychiatric symptoms resolved completely after efavirenz discontinuation.
Efavirenz is a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) which shows good inhibitory activity against HIV-1. Reduced susceptibility to efavirenz has been reported with HIV-1 variants containing single and multiple mutations to the reverse transcriptase enzyme. In vitro and in vivo data suggest that the resistance profile of efavirenz overlaps with that of the NNRTIs nevirapine and delavirdine. Clinically significant drug interactions have been reported with efavirenz and indinavir and saquinavir. An increase in dosage of indinavir from 800 to 1000 mg 3 times daily is recommended during coadministration with efavirenz. Use of efavirenz in combination with saquinavir as the sole protease inhibitor is not recommended. Once-daily efavirenz in combination with zidovudine plus lamivudine or indinavir or nelfinavir increased CD4+ cell counts and reduced HIV RNA plasma levels to below quantifiable levels (< 400 copies/ml) in HIV-infected patients. A sustained reduction in viral load was maintained for at least 72 weeks in 1 study. Nervous system symptoms (including headache, dizziness, insomnia and fatigue) and dermatological effects (including maculopapular rash) appear to be the most common adverse events reported with efavirenz-containing antiretroviral regimens.
INTRODUCTION: Little is published about mental disorders in Malawi, specifically in relation to Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and it's treatment. Efavirenz is a medication commonly used as part of triple therapy for HIV treatment. Indeed, in 2013, Malawi introduced 5A with Efavirenz as part of it's 1st line treatment for HIV. There exists some literature documenting known psychiatric side effects of Efavirenz, which include anxiety, mood changes, nightmares, psychosis and suicidal ideation. Little is known about what features are most common in the presentation and what factors in the patient and drug which may make this reaction more likely. AIM: The aim of this commentary is to review the association between HIV and psychiatric disorder, and consider the neuropsychiatric side-effects of Efavirenz. METHOD: An evaluative literature review was completed by means of multiple electronic database search as well as an additional manual search to obtain published works identified through the electronic search. Search terms used were: Efavirenz, Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome, Africa, Antiretroviral Therapy, Developing Countries, Malawi, Mental Disorders, Public Health, and Psychiatry. CONCLUSION: This is an important area of study, as potentially large numbers of individuals with HIV are being placed on Efavirenz as first line treatment, yet 60% may experience some form of neuropsychiatric side effects.
BACKGROUND: Many drugs used for the treatment of HIV disease can cause drug hypersensitivity reactions. Since 2002, World Health Organization (WHO) has recommended the use of nevirapine and efavirenz as part of first line antiretroviral therapies for several years. Both of the drugs had equivalent clinical efficacy but differences in toxicity profile. OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the incidence and predictors of nevirapine and efavirenz-associated rash among Indonesian HIV-infected patients. METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted among Indonesian patients who were using nevirapine or efavirenz between January 2004 to December 2013. All eligible predictors were analyzed using bivariate and multivariate analysis. RESULTS: 2,071 patients received nevirapine and 1,212 received efavirenz as first line therapies. The cumulative incidence of nevirapine-associated rash was 14% (95%CI: 12.5-15.5%) and evafirenz-associated rash was 4.5% (95%CI: 3.4-5.8%). Severe reactions occurred 1% patients receiving NVP and 0.1% patients receiving EFV, but no patients died due to these conditions. Predictors independently related with nevirapine-associated rash were female gender (adjusted RR = 1.622; 95%CI: 1.196-2.199; p = 0.002), baseline absolute CD4 count above 200 cells/mm3 (adjusted RR = 1.387; 95%CI: 1.041-1.847; p = 0.025), and hepatitis C co-infection (adjusted RR = 1.507; 95%CI: 1.138-1.995; p = 0.004). Baseline ALT level > 1.25 times upper normal limit (adjusted RR = 1.508; 95%CI: 0.998-2.278; p = 0.051) had a tendency to be a good predictor. None of the risk factors investigated was associated with developing efavirenz-associated rash. CONCLUSION: Female, baseline absolute CD4 count above 200 cells/mm3, hepatitis C co-infection and baseline ALT levels more than 1.25 times upper normal limit were predictors for nevirapine-associated rash in HIV patients.
OBJECTIVE: Antiretroviral drugs are the mainstay of treatment for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Lifelong highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) is indicated to prevent disease progression to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Efavirenz was a first-line component of HAART across the world for many years. The purpose of this article is to review the psychotropic properties of efavirenz, which are the most important adverse events associated with the drug and commonly result in treatment discontinuation. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A PubMed search was conducted using efavirenz as a search term, which returned 4655 results. Titles and abstracts of articles were screened for relevance, and all relevant articles published in English were included in the narrative review. RESULTS: Acute exposure to efavirenz may cause profound perceptual disturbances (delusions and hallucinations) whereas chronic exposure may be associated with abnormal dreams and other sleep disturbances, anxiety, depressed mood and suicidality. It may also be abused as a hallucinogen, especially in individuals with a history of poly-substance abuse. Recent research indicates that efavirenz directly affects monoaminergic neurotransmission and may partially substitute for psychedelic drugs, such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Efavirenz acts as a serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonist, a serotonin-dopamine reuptake inhibitor, an inhibitor of monoamine oxidase (MAO) and a vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) inhibitor, which are mechanisms common with many psychotropic drugs. Efavirenz interacts with many of the same molecular targets as the empathogen methylendioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), but the effects of the 2 drugs may differ. CONCLUSIONS: The exact mechanism of action of efavirenz as a psychotropic drug remains unclear and future studies should focus on evaluating whether prolonged exposure could lead to irreversible side effects.
BACKGROUND: Unwanted weight gain affects some people living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) who are prescribed integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs). Mechanisms and risk factors are incompletely understood. METHODS: We utilized 2 cohorts to study pharmacogenetics of weight gain following switch from efavirenz- to INSTI-based regimens. In an observational cohort, we studied weight gain at 48 weeks following switch from efavirenz- to INSTI-based regimens among patients who had been virologically suppressed for at least 2 years at a clinic in the United States. Associations were characterized with CYP2B6 and UGT1A1 genotypes that affect efavirenz and INSTI metabolism, respectively. In a clinical trials cohort, we studied weight gain at 48 weeks among treatment-naive participants who were randomized to receive efavirenz-containing regimens in AIDS Clinical Trials Group studies A5095, A5142, and A5202 and did not receive INSTIs. RESULTS: In the observational cohort (n = 61), CYP2B6 slow metabolizers had greater weight gain after switch (P = .01). This was seen following switch to elvitegravir or raltegravir, but not dolutegravir. UGT1A1 genotype was not associated with weight gain. In the clinical trials cohort (n = 462), CYP2B6 slow metabolizers had lesser weight gain at week 48 among participants receiving efavirenz with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (P = .001), but not those receiving efavirenz with abacavir (P = .65). Findings were consistent when stratified by race/ethnicity and by sex. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients who switched from efavirenz- to INSTI-based therapy, CYP2B6 genotype was associated with weight gain, possibly reflecting withdrawal of the inhibitory effect of higher efavirenz concentrations on weight gain. The difference by concomitant nucleoside analogue is unexplained.
Efavirenz, used in treating pediatric human immunodeficiency virus infection, has central nervous system side effects. We report on a 5-year-old girl with perinatally acquired human immunodeficiency virus infection, presenting with new onset absence seizures after starting treatment with efavirenz. Plasma efavirenz values were above therapeutic range. The child was homozygous for the CYP2B6-516T/T genotype, which is associated with poor efavirenz clearance. Seizures abated after efavirenz discontinuation.
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors are the prime members of antiretroviral therapy that are presently employed for the management of the human immunodeficiency virus. It uses an enzyme i.e., reverse transcriptase to convert its ribonucleic acid into reverse transcription; these agents impede the function of reverse transcriptase and reverse transcription counter human immunodeficiency virus from replicating. Efavirenz is the first-generation non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor agent. Similar to the other non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor agents; it is prescribed with other inhibitors in combination for regimens antiretroviral therapy. To enhance survival and avoid aggressive infections in patients affected with human immunodeficiency virus infection, adequate antiretroviral therapy is the most significant treatment. Accordingly, the development and validation of such therapeutic agents are challenging work for the analysts. Therefore, the proposed review integrally addresses the analytical reports of efavirenz recorded in the literature databases like Scopus, Web of Science, Google Scholar, Pub-Med, and through many other sources. It has been remarked that for the development of efavirenz many analytical techniques were used for addressing the qualitative and quantitative estimation of efavirenz from various pharmaceutical and biological matrices. This review plan to review the stereochemistry, mechanism of action, resistance, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, safety and adverse reaction, and various analytical approaches assessed for the same. The hyphenated and chromatographic techniques are frequently used for analysis of cited drug.
The non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor efavirenz is part of the WHO guidelines for preferred first-line treatment of HIV-1-infected adults, pregnant and lactating women, and children. Efavirenz is well known to cause CNS toxicity. Although good data for CNS toxicity are available for adults, the opposite is true for children. Paediatric studies on this topic frequently suffer from small sample sizes or absence of thorough neuropsychiatric assessments. In this Personal View, we focus on two knowledge gaps of CNS toxicity of efavirenz in children. First, plasma concentrations of efavirenz are difficult to predict in children because of immaturity of and genetic variation in metabolic enzymes. Second, efavirenz exerts a lysergide (LSD)-like effect on brain serotonergic pathways and affects CNS metabolic pathways, including mitochondrial function. Whether these effects interfere with normal brain development is unknown. These uncertainties underline the imminent need for better monitoring of mental health and neurocognitive development in children given and exposed to efavirenz.
