BACKGROUND: Tenofovir alafenamide shows high antiviral efficacy and improved renal and bone safety compared with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate when used for HIV treatment. Here, we report primary results from a blinded phase 3 study evaluating the efficacy and safety of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) with emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide versus emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate for HIV prevention. METHODS: This study is an ongoing, randomised, double-blind, multicentre, active-controlled, phase 3, non-inferiority trial done at 94 community, public health, and hospital-associated clinics located in regions of Europe and North America, where there is a high incidence of HIV or prevalence of people living with HIV, or both. We enrolled adult cisgender men who have sex with men and transgender women who have sex with men, both with a high risk of acquiring HIV on the basis of their self-reported sexual behaviour in the past 12 weeks or their recent history (within 24 weeks of enrolment) of bacterial sexually transmitted infections. Participants with current or previous use of PrEP with emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate were not excluded. We used a computer-generated random allocation sequence to randomly assign (1:1) participants to receive either emtricitabine (200 mg) and tenofovir alafenamide (25 mg) tablets daily, with matched placebo tablets (emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide group), or emtricitabine (200 mg) and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (300 mg) tablets daily, with matched placebo tablets (emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate group). As such, all participants were given two tablets. The trial sponsor, investigators, participants, and the study staff who provided the study drugs, assessed the outcomes, and collected the data were masked to group assignment. The primary efficacy outcome was incident HIV infection, which was assessed when all participants had completed 48 weeks of follow-up and half of all participants had completed 96 weeks of follow-up. This full analysis set included all randomly assigned participants who had received at least one dose of the assigned study drug and had at least one post-baseline HIV test. Non-inferiority of emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide to emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate was established if the upper bound of the 95.003% CI of the HIV incidence rate ratio (IRR) was less than the prespecified non-inferiority margin of 1.62. We prespecified six secondary bone mineral density and renal biomarker safety endpoints to evaluate using the safety analysis set. This analysis set included all randomly assigned participants who had received at least one dose of the assigned study drug. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02842086, and is no longer recruiting. FINDINGS: Between Sept 13, 2016, and June 30, 2017, 5387 (92%) of 5857 participants were randomly assigned and received emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide (n=2694) or emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (n=2693). At the time of the primary efficacy analysis (ie, when all participants had completed 48 weeks and 50% had completed 96 weeks) emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide was non-inferior to emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate for HIV prevention, as the upper limit of the 95% CI of the IRR, was less than the prespecified non-inferiority margin of 1.62 (IRR 0.47 [95% CI 0.19-1.15]). After 8756 person-years of follow-up, 22 participants were diagnosed with HIV, seven participants in the emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide group (0.16 infections per 100 person-years [95% CI 0.06-0.33]), and 15 participants in the emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate group (0.34 infections per 100 person-years [0.19-0.56]). Both regimens were well tolerated, with a low number of participants reporting adverse events that led to discontinuation of the study drug (36 [1%] of 2694 participants in the emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide group vs 49 [2%] of 2693 participants in the emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate group). Emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide was superior to emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in all six prespecified bone mineral density and renal biomarker safety endpoints. INTERPRETATION: Daily emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide shows non-inferior efficacy to daily emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate for HIV prevention, and the number of adverse events for both regimens was low. Emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide had more favourable effects on bone mineral density and biomarkers of renal safety than emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. FUNDING: Gilead Sciences.
BACKGROUND: Cabotegravir plus rilpivirine is the only approved complete long-acting regimen for the maintenance of HIV-1 virological suppression dosed every 2 months. The SOLAR study aimed to compare long-acting cabotegravir plus rilpivirine every 2 months with continued once-daily bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide for the maintenance of HIV-1 virological suppression in adults living with HIV. METHODS: SOLAR is a randomised, open-label, multicentre, phase 3b, non-inferiority study. The study was done in 118 centres across 14 countries. Participants with HIV-1 RNA less than 50 copies per mL were randomly assigned (2:1), stratified by sex at birth and BMI, to either long-acting cabotegravir (600 mg) plus rilpivirine (900 mg) dosed intramuscularly every 2 months or to continue daily oral bictegravir (50 mg), emtricitabine (200 mg), and tenofovir alafenamide (25 mg). Participants randomly assigned to long-acting therapy had a choice to receive cabotegravir (30 mg) plus rilpivirine (25 mg) once daily as an optional oral lead-in for approximately 1 month. The primary efficacy endpoint was the proportion of participants with virological non-response (HIV-1 RNA >/=50 copies per mL; the US Food and Drug Administration snapshot algorithm, 4% non-inferiority margin; modified intention-to-treat exposed population) at month 11 (long-acting start with injections group) and month 12 (long-acting with oral lead-in group and bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide group). The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04542070, and is ongoing. FINDINGS: 837 participants were screened between Nov 9, 2020, and May 31, 2021, and 687 were randomly assigned to switch treatment or continue existing treatment. Of 670 participants (modified intention-to-treat exposed population), 447 (67%) switched to long-acting therapy (274 [61%] of 447 start with injections; 173 [39%] of 447 with oral lead-in) and 223 (33%) continued bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide. Baseline characteristics were similar; median age was 37 years (range 18-74), 118 (18%) of 670 were female sex at birth, 207 (31%) of 670 were non-White, and median BMI was 25.9 kg/m(2) (IQR 23.3-29.5). At month 11-12, long-acting cabotegravir plus rilpivirine showed non-inferior efficacy versus bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide (HIV-1 RNA >/=50 copies per mL, five [1%] of 447 vs one [<1%] of 223), with an adjusted treatment difference of 0.7 (95% CI -0.7 to 2.0). Excluding injection site reactions, adverse events and serious adverse events were similar between groups. No treatment-related deaths occurred. More long-acting group participants had adverse events leading to withdrawal (25 [6%] of 454 vs two [1%] of 227). Injection site reactions were reported by 316 (70%) of 454 long-acting participants; most (98%) were grade 1 or 2. INTERPRETATION: These data support the use of long-acting cabotegravir plus rilpivirine dosed every 2 months as a complete antiretroviral regimen that has similar efficacy to a commonly used integrase strand transfer inhibitor-based first-line regimen, while addressing unmet psychosocial issues associated with daily oral treatment. FUNDING: ViiV Healthcare.
Gilead Sciences has developed a single tablet anti-HIV-1 medication (Biktarvy((R))) combining the novel integrase strand transfer inhibitor (INSTI) bictegravir with the nucleos(t)ide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide. This fixed dose combination has demonstrated efficacy as treatment for both anti-retroviral naive and virologically suppressed HIV-1 infection in patients switching therapy, and was recently approved in the USA. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of bictegravir leading to this first approval of bictegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide as treatment for HIV-1 infection.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: In this review, we will highlight and discuss the recent efficacy and safety data of bictegravir (BIC), a novel second-generation integrase strand transfer inhibitor (INSTI) that has been recently approved, in coformulation with emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide (B/F/TAF), for the treatment of HIV-1 infection in antiretroviral naive subjects and in those with suppressed viremia. RECENT FINDINGS: Preclinical data showed that BIC has a genetic barrier that is higher than that of raltegravir and elvitegravir but is similar to that of dolutegravir (DTG), with retained activity in vitro against isolates containing substitutions associated with resistance against other INSTIs. Its pharmacokinetic interaction risks appear to be low. Results of the phase 3 GS-US-380-1489 and GS-US-380-1490 clinical trials showed that the coformulation B/F/TAF is not inferior to the recommended DTG-containing regimens in naive subjects. Moreover, B/F/TAF exhibited excellent tolerability, and no treatment-emergent resistance to any component of the coformulation was observed. In addition, preliminary data support switching from DTG and emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide or boosted protease inhibitor-containing regimens to B/F/TAF in subjects with undetectable viremia. SUMMARY: The coformulation bictegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide is set to become a new option in the management of patients who are antiretroviral naive and in those with suppressed viremia.
Background: forgiveness is the ability of a given regimen to maintain complete viral suppression despite a documented imperfect adherence. We explored forgiveness of bictegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide. Methods: drug refills were used to calculate the percent day covered (PDC) as a proxy of adherence. Forgiveness was calculated as the achieved rate of a selected HIV-RNA threshold by a given level of imperfect adherence. Results: 281 adult PLWH were followed for 343 patient/years. Adherence was very high with a median of 98% (IQR 95-100%). A PDC as low as 70% was sufficient to obtain 100% and maintain virologic suppression. According to probit analysis adherence was not related to the possibility to maintain an HIV-RNA TND or < 50 copies/ml. Conclusions: Long-term success of ART needs effective regimens that are the least intrusive of the patient's lifestyle, an elevated forgiveness may be considered as an additional feature that can further improve long-term outcomes.
