Compared with single-targeted therapy, the design and synthesis of heterozygous molecules is still a significant challenge for the discovery of antitumor drugs. Quinone oxidoreductase-1 (NQO1) is a potential target for selective cancer therapy due to its overexpression in many cancer cells and its unique bioredox properties. Based on the principle of combinatorial drug design, we successfully synthesized a new hybrid molecules 13 with an indolequinone structure. We found that the synthesized compounds exhibited much higher cytotoxicity against the tested cancer cells than free drugs. Further mechanism studies confirmed that compound 13 induced cell apoptosis was achieved by regulating p53-dependent mitochondrial pathway and cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeted drugs (erlotinib, etc.) are used to treat multiple types of tumours. EGFR is highly expressed in most triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. However, only a small proportion of TNBC patients benefit from EGFR-targeted drugs in clinical trials, and the resistance mechanism is unclear. Here, we found that PDZ domain containing 1 (PDZK1) is downregulated in erlotinib-resistant TNBC cells, suggesting that PDZK1 downregulation is related to erlotinib resistance in TNBC. PDZK1 binds to EGFR. Through this interaction, PDZK1 promotes EGFR degradation by enhancing the binding of EGFR to c-Cbl and inhibits EGFR phosphorylation by hindering EGFR dimerisation. We also found that PDZK1 is specifically downregulated in TNBC tissues and correlated with a poor prognosis in TNBC patients. In vitro and in vivo functional assays showed that PDZK1 suppressed TNBC development. Restoration of EGFR expression or kinase inhibitor treatment reversed the degree of cell malignancy induced by PDZK1 overexpression or knockdown, respectively. PDZK1 overexpression sensitised TNBC cells to erlotinib both in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion, PDZK1 is a significant prognostic factor for TNBC and a potential molecular therapeutic target for reversing erlotinib resistance in TNBC cells.
A comprehensive investigation of tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib (ERL) electrochemical behavior and interaction with DNA was performed with the aim to clarify its redox mechanism and to determine the mode of binding. Irreversible oxidation and reduction processes of ERL on glassy carbon electrode were investigated using three voltammetric techniques CV, DPV, SWV in pH range between 2.0 and 9.0. Oxidation was established as an adsorption-controlled process, while the reduction manifested diffusion-adsorption mixed controlled process in acidic medium and adsorption became predominant in the neutral solutions. According to the determined number of transferred electrons and protons, oxidation and reduction mechanism of ERL are proposed. To follow the interaction between ERL and DNA, the multilayer ct-DNA electrochemical biosensor was incubated in ERL solutions concentrations ranged from 2 x 10(-7) M to 5 x 10(-5) M (pH 4.6) for 30 min. SWV measurements have shown the decrease in deoxyadenosine peak current as a consequence of ERL increased concentration and binding to ct-DNA. The calculated value of binding constant was K = 8.25 x 10(4) M(-1). Molecular docking showed that ERL forms hydrophobic interactions when docked into minor groove, as well as when intercalated, and molecular dynamics analysis predicted the stability of obtained complexes. These results together with voltammetric studies imply that the intercalation could be more dominant way ERL binding to DNA compared to minor groove binding.
OBJECTIVES: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a very lethal malignancy with a scarcity of treatment options. Although erlotinib- and gemcitabine-based treatments have been approved for PC, their effectiveness is limited. The present study is aimed at exploring the molecular and epigenetic mechanisms of anticancer activities of homoharringtonine (HHT) and its interaction with erlotinib to develop a potential therapeutic strategy for PC. METHODS: The RT-qPCR, western blotting, immunofluorescence and expression-vectors and oligonucleotide transfection were employed to determine the expression characteristics of onco-factors. Anticancer activities were determined by MTT, colony forming, and flowcytometric analysis. Dual luciferase assay was conducted to confirm putative target of miR-130b-3p. In-vivo experiments were followed by immunohistochemical assay. KEY FINDINGS: The EphB4/JAK2/STAT3 pathway drives the growth and proliferation of PC through induction of prosurvival factors and cell cycle mediators. HHT directly and epigenetically via miR-130b-3p targets EphB4, leading to downregulation of JAK2/STAT3 pathway. The inactivation of STAT3 results in diminution of antiapoptotic factors and cell cycle mediators. HHT also enhances the anticancer activity of erlotinib. CONCLUSIONS: HHT demonstrates potential anticancer activities in PC by downregulating EphB4/JAK2/STAT3 signalling. HHT also produces synergistic effects with erlotinib.
In patients with non-small-cell lung cancer harboring an epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) active mutation, central nervous system progression after a response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors is frequent. Central nervous system metastasis, especially leptomeningeal carcinomatosis (LMC), is a serious complication and no standard treatment has been established for LMC. Here, we report two cases in which the addition of bevacizumab to erlotinib enhanced the efficacy against LMC; as a result, radiographic abnormalities decreased markedly and symptoms were well controlled. This combination treatment may be useful to treat LMC in patients with EGFR-positive non-small-cell lung cancer.
Erlotinib and gefitinib are quinazoline derivatives with antineoplastic properties. Usually, intake of antineoplastic agents results in much a greater degree of oxidative stress, i.e. the production of free radicals, than induced by cancer itself. Hence, anticancerous drugs must also exhibit antioxidant activity but this has not been studied thus far. In this study, the antioxidant activity of erlotinib and gefitinib was examined by experimental and computational studies. It was found that erlotinib and gefitinib exhibit good 2,2-dipheny l-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical and hydroxyl radical scavenging (HRS) activities. In DPPH assay, the IC(50) for erlotinib and gefitinib were 0.584 and 0.696 mM, respectively, while IC(50) for HRS assay were 0.843 and 1.03 mM for erlotinib and gefitinib, respectively. Structural characteristics such as frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs), molecular electrostatic potential maps (MESPs), and global descriptive parameters were calculated at DFT/B3LYP/6-311++G (d,p) on the optimized geometries of erlotinib and gefitinib. UV-visible spectroscopy revealed the possible electronic transitions between the FMOs and their associated excitation energies of both drugs and found that erlotinib has pi to pi* transitions while gefitinib has pi to pi* and sigma to pi* transitions. To elucidate the antioxidant activity of erlotinib and gefitinib, three mechanisms namely hydrogen atom transfer (HAT), single electron transfer proton transfer (SETPT), and sequential proton-loss electron-transfer (SPLET) were employed and articulated the results in arithmetic parameters like bond dissociation energy (BDE), proton affinity (PA), ionization potential (IP), electron transfer enthalpy (ETE), and proton dissociation enthalpy (PDE). Further, molecular docking studies have been carried out to have a better understanding of binding sites and modes of interaction with a well-known antioxidant target protein monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B) employing docking scores and types of interactions. All the calculated parameters point out that though gefitinib and erlotinib were interchangeable, erlotinib requires a lesser amount of energy for proton transfer and electron transfer, moreover it scavenges radicals easily.
Preclinical data showed that intercalated administration of epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) and chemotherapy might be effective in the treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). This review will summarize and discuss the clinical results available to date from prospective studies investigating this approach. Areas covered: A structured search of bibliographic databases for peer-reviewed literature and of main International meetings was undertaken, for trials testing the intercalated addition of EGFR-TKIs to chemotherapy in advanced NSCLC. Expert commentary: The results of intercalated schedules of EGFR-TKI and chemotherapy are interesting but somewhat contrasting. This approach could represent a potential treatment option in patients with advanced NSCLC, that deserves to be further investigated within well-designed randomized trials.
PURPOSE: Erlotinib has been the only targeted agent to show significantly improved outcomes in pancreatic adenocarcinoma when combined with gemcitabine. We aimed to evaluate whether the addition of oxaliplatin to a combination gemcitabine/erlotinib treatment conferred a clinical benefit in patients with locally advanced unresectable or metastatic pancreatic cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Chemotherapy-naive patients with locally advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer were randomly assigned to receive GEMOX-T [gemcitabine 1000 mg/m(2) and oxaliplatin 50 mg/m(2) on day 1 (D1) and D8 plus erlotinib 100 mg daily for 3 weeks] or GT (gemcitabine 1000 mg/m(2) on D1 and D8 plus erlotinib 100 mg daily for 3 weeks). The primary endpoint was the overall response rate (ORR). RESULTS: Between 2013 and 2016, 65 patients were assigned to a treatment group (33 in the GEMOX-T arm, 32 in the GT arm). The ORR was 18.2% [95% confidence interval (CI), 8.82-27.58] in the GEMOX-T arm and 6.2% (95% CI, 0.34-12.06) in the GT arm (p=0.051). The disease control rate was significantly superior in the GEMOX-T arm compared to the GT arm (72.7% vs. 43.8%, p=0.019). After a median follow-up of 19.7 months, the median progression-free survival (PFS) was 3.9 months for the GEMOX-T arm and 1.4 months for the GT arm (p=0.033). However, this did not translate to an improvement in overall survival. The most common grade 3 or higher hematologic adverse events were neutropenia (16.9%) and anemia (13.8%). CONCLUSION: The addition of oxaliplatin to a first-line gemcitabine/erlotinib regimen demonstrated higher response rates and significantly improved PFS in patients with locally advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer.
Gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib are three widely used epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR TKIs) for treating advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with proven efficacy. We undertook a systematic review and meta-analysis to synthesize existing studies with direct comparisons of EGFR TKIs in NSCLC in terms of both efficacy and safety. Eight randomized trials and 82 cohort studies with a total of 17,621 patients were included for analysis. Gefitinib and erlotinib demonstrated comparable effects on progression-free survival (hazard ratio [HR], 1.00; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.95 to 1.04), overall survival (HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.93 to 1.06), overall response rate (risk ratio [RR], 1.05; 95% CI, 1.00 to 1.11), and disease control rate (RR, 0.98; 95% CI, 0.96 to 1.01), which did not vary considerably with EGFR mutation status, ethnicity, line of treatment, and baseline brain metastasis status. Gefitinib was associated with more grade 3/4 liver dysfunction, but tended to cause lower rates of dose reduction, treatment discontinuation, total grade 3/4 adverse events (RR, 0.78; 95% CI 0.65 to 0.94), and a number of specific adverse events such as rash and diarrhea. No solid evidence was found that afatinib had greater efficacy than gefitinib or erlotinib in first-line treatment of EGFR-mutant NSCLC. However, afatinib was more effective than erlotinib as second-line treatment of patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma. The grade 3/4 adverse events rate of afatinib was comparable to that of erlotinib but higher than that of gefitinib.
Pemphigus is a severe blistering disease caused by autoantibodies primarily against the desmosomal cadherins desmoglein (DSG)1 and DSG3, which impair desmosome integrity. Especially for the acute phase, additional treatment options allowing to reduce corticosteroids would fulfill an unmet medical need. In this study, we provide evidence that EGFR inhibition by erlotinib ameliorates pemphigus vulgaris IgG-induced acantholysis in intact human epidermis. Pemphigus vulgaris IgG caused phosphorylation of EGFR (Y845) and Rous sarcoma-related kinase in human epidermis. In line with this, a phosphotyrosine kinome analysis revealed a robust response associated with EGFR and Rous sarcoma-related kinase family kinase signaling in response to pemphigus vulgaris IgG but not to pemphigus foliaceus autoantibodies. Erlotinib inhibited pemphigus vulgaris IgG-induced epidermal blistering and EGFR phosphorylation, loss of desmosomes, as well as ultrastructural alterations of desmosome size, plaque symmetry, and keratin filament insertion and restored the desmosome midline considered as hallmark of mature desmosomes. Erlotinib enhanced both single-molecule DSG3-binding frequency and strength and delayed DSG3 fluorescence recovery, supporting that EGFR inhibition increases DSG3 availability and cytoskeletal anchorage. Our data indicate that EGFR is a promising target for pemphigus therapy owing to its link to several signaling pathways known to be involved in pemphigus pathogenesis.
Dual inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathways may delay therapeutic resistance in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). This phase 3 study investigated the efficacy and safety of an erlotinib plus bevacizumab regimen in untreated patients with advanced NSCLC. In total, 311 patients received bevacizumab plus erlotinib (n = 157) or erlotinib only (n = 154). Progression-free survival (PFS) was 17.9 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 15.2-19.9) for bevacizumab plus erlotinib and 11.2 months (95% CI, 9.7-13.8) for erlotinib only (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.55; 95% CI, 0.41-0.73; p < 0.001). A brain metastases subgroup treated with bevacizumab plus erlotinib also showed improved PFS (HR = 0.48; 95% CI, 0.27-0.84; p = 0.008). Grade >/=3 treatment-related adverse events occurred in 86 (54.8%) and 40 (26.1%) patients, respectively. Bevacizumab plus erlotinib significantly improved PFS in patients with untreated metastatic EGFR-mutated NSCLC, including those with brain metastases at baseline.
During the past few years, advances in drag delivery have provided many opportunities in the treatment of various diseases and cancer. Arsenic trioxide (ATO) and Erlotinib (Erlo) are two drugs, approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration to treat cancer, but their use is limited in terms of the toxicity of ATO and the low solubility of Erlo. This study aimed to prepare arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD)-decorated nanoliposomes (NLPs) containing Erlo and ATO (NLPs-ATO-Erlo-RGD) to increase the solubility and reduce the toxicity of Erlo and ATO for cancer treatment. The results of transmission electron microscopy and dynamic light scattering showed that NLPs were synthesized uniformly, with spherical shape morphology and particle sizes between 140 and 160 nm. High-performance liquid chromatography and ICP-MS results showed that about 90% of the drug was loaded in the NLPs. In comparison with NLPs-ATO-Erlo, NLPs-ATO-Erlo-RGD demonstrated considerable toxicity against the alphavbeta3 overexpressing PC3 cell line in the MTT experiment. It had no effect on the PANC-1 cell line. In addition, apoptosis assays using Annexin V/PI demonstrated that NLPs-ATO-Erlo-RGD generated the highest apoptotic rates in PC3 cells when compared with NLPs-ATO-Erlo and the combination of free ATO and Erlo. Furthermore, treatment with NLPs-ATO-Erlo-RGD in (p < 0.05) PC3 cell line significantly reduced EGFR level. It is concluded NLPs-ATO-Erlo-RGD as a novel drug delivery system may be a promising platform for the treatment of cancer.
The objective of this study was to improve the solubility and inhibit the crystallisation during the gastric-to-intestinal transfer of Erlotinib (ERL), a small molecule kinase inhibitor (smKI) compound class, which is classified as class II drug in the Biopharmaceutical Classification System (BCS). A screening approach combining different parameters (solubility in aqueous media, inhibitory effect of drug crystallisation from supersaturated drug solutions) was applied to selected polymers for the development of solid amorphous dispersions of ERL. ERL solid amorphous dispersions formulations were then prepared with 3 different polymers (Soluplus(R), HPMC-AS-L, HPMC-AS-H) at a fixed drug: polymer ratio (1:4) by two different production methods (spray drying and hot melt extrusion). The spray-dried particles and cryo-milled extrudates were characterized by thermal properties, shape and particle size, solubility and dissolution behavior in aqueous media. The influence of the manufacturing process on these solid characteristics was also identified during this study. Based on the obtained results, it is concluded that the cryo-milled extrudates of HPMC-AS-L displayed better performance (enhanced solubility, reduced ERL crystallization during the simulated gastric-to-intestinal transfer) and represents a promising amorphous solid dispersion formulation for oral administration of ERL.
OBJECTIVES: Combination treatment with erlotinib plus bevacizumab has the potential to become a standard treatment regimen for patients with epidermal growth factor receptor mutation-positive (EGFRm(+)) advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). This study aimed to investigate the efficacy and safety of erlotinib plus bevacizumab in patients with EGFRm(+) advanced NSCLC. DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis. DATA SOURCES: The PubMed, Embase, Web of Science and Cochrane Library databases were searched, from inception to 15 January 2022. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs), reported in English, assessing the efficacy of erlotinib plus bevacizumab versus erlotinib monotherapy in patients with EGFRm (+) advanced NSCLC. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: The main objective was to assess overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), objective response rate (ORR) and adverse events (AEs). Two independent reviewers extracted data and assessed the risk of bias. A random-effects model was used where there was evidence for homogeneous effects. RESULTS: Four RCTs (reported across six publications) were included in the meta-analysis, with a total of 775 patients included in the pooled analyses of PFS, OS and ORR (387 in the erlotinib plus bevacizumab intervention group and 388 in the erlotinib group). Compared with the erlotinib alone group, the erlotinib plus bevacizumab group achieved a significantly prolonged PFS (HR: 0.59; 95% CI 0.49 to 0.72; p<0.00001; I(2)=0%), but OS (HR: 0.95; 95% CI 0.78 to 1.15; p=0.59; I(2)=0%) and ORR (OR: 1.25; 95% CI 0.89 to 1.74; p=0.19; I(2)=0%) were not significantly prolonged. A total of 776 cases were used for a pooled analysis of AEs. Regarding AEs, combined treatment significantly increased the incidence of diarrhoea (51% vs 43%, 95% CI 1.03 to 1.38; p=0.006), haemorrhagic events (41% vs 20%, 95% CI 1.12 to 6.31; p=0.03), proteinuria (25% vs 3%, 95% CI 4.86 to 17.66; p<0.0001) and hypertension (40% vs 8%, 95% CI 3.66 to 7.88; p<0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: Erlotinib plus bevacizumab for the treatment of patients with EGFRm(+) advanced NSCLC was associated with significantly prolonged PFS compared with erlotinib alone, but the combination did not prolong OS.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been implicated in a multiplicity of cancer-related signal transduction pathways like cellular proliferation, adhesion, migration, neoangiogenesis and apoptosis inhibition, all of which are important features of cancerogenesis and tumour progression. Its tyrosine kinase activity plays a central role in mediating these processes and has been intensely studied to exploit it as a therapeutic target. Inhibitors of this pathway have been developed and assessed in trials with significant efficacy in clinical applications. The current review focuses in particular on the clinical data of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibition in different tumour entities, preferably non-small cell lung cancer and pancreatic cancer with emphasis to the approved small molecule erlotinib. Its clinical applications, evidence-based efficacy and toxicity as well as predictive markers of response are discussed.
