In the present study, we determine the synergistic activity of ertapenem with cefazolin and flucloxacillin against type A beta-lactamase producing Methicillin susceptible Staphylococcus aureus isolate. In the time kill assay, at standard inoculum, ertapenem with cefazolin showed >1 log kill and ertapenem with flucloxacillin demonstrated >2 log kill. When tested at high inoculum, both combinations achieved >1 log kill at 1x MIC.
We describe outcomes of patients with infections with carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae (CRKP) who received ertapenem-containing double-carbapenem therapy (ECDCT). Clinical success was observed in 7/18 (39%) patients overall: bloodstream infections, 3/7 (43%); pneumonia, 1/5 (20%); intraabdominal infections, 0/2 (0%); urinary tract infections, 2/3 (67%); and a skin and skin structure infection, 1/1 (100%). Microbiologic success was observed in 11/14 (79%) evaluable patients; 5/18 (28%) patients died. ECDCT may be effective for CRKP infections with limited treatment options.
In vitro selection of mutants with decreased susceptibility to ertapenem was performed using Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae clinical strains producing either the bla(CTX-M-2), bla(CTX-M-3), bla(CTX-M-9), or bla(CTX-M-15) gene. Frequencies of mutants with decreased susceptibilities to ertapenem were similar for all beta-lactamases expressed.
Neonatal sepsis remains a high cause of morbidity and mortality in preterm neonates. Methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) can cause persistent bloodstream infections and invasive disease in neonates. We report the first published case of persistent MSSA bacteremia in a preterm neonate successfully treated with oxacillin and ertapenem combination therapy.
BACKGROUND: Interest in carbapenems has been rising in the last few years due to the emergence of drug resistant tuberculosis. Ertapenem (ETP), given once a day parenteral, and faropenem (FAR), oral, have a better administration profile than meropenem (MEM), imipenem (IPM) and doripenem (DOR). The addition of amoxicillin-clavulanate (AMC) inhibits the hydrolysis by the carbapenemase present in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). The aim of this study was to determine the in vitro activity of ETP and FAR against susceptible and resistant clinical MTB strains by two widely use methodologies, the BACTEC960 MGIT and microdilution. RESULTS: 19 clinical isolates with different susceptibility profiles and H37Rv were included. Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) testing was performed using two methods of different concentrations of ETP and FAR with and without AMC. MIC50 was 2 and 8 for FAR with and without AMC by both methods. MIC90 was > 16 and > 8 by microdilution and MGIT respectively and did not change after AMC addition. 18/20 samples were resistant to the highest concentration of ETP, with and without AMC. Half of the samples had some susceptibility to FAR; addition of AMC further reduced the MIC level in seven isolates. 10/20 isolates showed susceptibility to FAR and the addition of AMC further reduced the MIC in 7 isolates. However, most of the MICs were near the limit of effectiveness (8 mug/mL). Resistance to FAR was associated with resistance to MEM (p = 0.04) but not to resistance profiles of other drugs, including M/XDR status. CONCLUSIONS: The lack of ETP activity may be associated with its degradation, independent of carbapenemase, during incubation. No susceptibility pattern to traditional drugs can predict susceptibility to FAR and susceptibility testing is not routinely available. PK/PD studies are needed as reaching the concentrations tested in these experiments may be challenging. This work highlighted some of the limitations of carbapenem use. More evidence is needed to clarify their true impact in TB treatment and outcome, considering the financial burden, complications and microbiota changes associated with their use.
The use of left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) is increasingly more common as the availability of donor organs in relation to failing hearts is outstandingly limited. Infections are the most common complications in LVAD recipients, particularly those caused by Staphylococcus spp. Refractory LVAD-related infections are not uncommon as achieving adequate source control is often not feasible before heart transplantation. Evidence suggest that cefazolin plus ertapenem is effective in refractory methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) bacteremia, but this approach has not been described in LVAD recipients. In this article, we report two cases of refractory MSSA bacteremia in LVAD recipients that were successfully treated with salvage therapy with cefazolin plus ertapenem and subsequent heart transplantation. This treatment strategy should be considered in patients with refractory LVAD-associated infection due to MSSA that are not responding to standard treatment.
Little is known about the in vitro activity of penems and carbapenems against the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. Here, faropenem, ertapenem, imipenem and meropenem as well as the third-generation cephalosporin ceftriaxone and tobramycin were tested in vitro against 11 isolates of the B. burgdorferi sensu lato complex. On a microg/mL basis, ertapenem was the most potent carbapenem (minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) range: 0.015-0.125 microg/mL), with in vitro activity comparable with that of ceftriaxone against Borrelia. These findings are supported by the results of time-kill experiments in a Borrelia afzelii skin isolate, demonstrating a >3 log10 unit (99.9%) reduction of the inoculum after 96 h of exposure to either drug at a concentration of three log2 unit dilutions above the respective MIC.
We investigated ertapenem-susceptible and -resistant extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacter cloacae isolates obtained from the same patient. Gene transcription of OmpD and OmpF was diminished in the ertapenem-resistant isolate. An efflux pump inhibitor decreased the MICs of ertapenem in the resistant strain, suggesting a potential role of efflux pumps in ertapenem resistance.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Administration of carbapenems to beta-lactam-allergic patients has always been considered potentially harmful because of a 47.4% rate of cross-reactivity to imipenem reported in a single study. Nevertheless, recent studies have shown that the rate of cross-reactivity of imipenem and meropenem with penicillins is lower than 1%. The aim of this study was to evaluate the possibility of using ertapenem in patients with an established IgE-mediated beta-lactam allergy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied all participants who came to our allergy unit and had a clinical history of immediate hypersensitivity reactions to beta-lactams. The inclusion criteria were a positive skin test result to at least 1 beta-lactam molecule and/or positive specific IgE (when available). All participants underwent immediate-type skin tests with several beta-lactam molecules including ertapenem. Challenges with intravenous ertapenem were performed on 2 different days in patients with negative skin test results. RESULTS: We examined 49 patients with a clinical history of immediate reactions to beta-lactams. All the patients had positive skin tests and/or positive specific IgE to at least 1 beta-lactam reagent and negative carbapenem skin tests. Thirty-six patients agreed to undergo the challenges and 35 tolerated the full dose of ertapenem. CONCLUSIONS: The practice of avoiding carbapenems in patients with beta-lactam allergy should be abandoned considering the very low rate of cross-reactivity. beta-Lactam-allergic patients who need ertapenem therapy should undergo skin tests and, if negative, a graded challenge to assess tolerability.
BACKGROUND: The approved dosing of ertapenem in patients with chronic kidney disease stage 5 utilizing dialysis (CKD-5D) is 0.5 g intravenous daily. Several reports associated this dosing strategy with neurotoxicity. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to identify the incidence of neurotoxicity in this population and the risk factors associated with this toxicity. The secondary objective was to review the literature and discuss a safer/cost-effective dosing strategy based on available data. METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted screening all patients who received ertapenem and hemodialysis at our quaternary hospital between May 2015 and March 2019. Patients' demographics, comorbidities, concomitant drugs (known to induce neurotoxicity), and seizure history were collected. RESULTS: A total of 99 eligible patients were identified; 10 of them (10%) developed neurotoxicity. The patients who developed neurotoxicity were all male; mean age was 74 +/- 9 years as compared with 68.9 +/- 13 years in the sample. Bivariate relationships between all predictors and the seizures (dichotomously coded) were estimated to investigate the risk factors. The following were the significant predictors of seizures: male sex (17%; P = 0.014), dementia (27%; P = 0.012), and concomitant use of beta-lactams, aminoglycosides, or fluoroquinolones (19.6%; P = 0.042). CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: The currently approved ertapenem dose imposes a risk of developing neurotoxicity in patients with CKD-5D. Utilizing the published data in this population, alternative post-dialysis dosing strategies administered through dialysis access such as 1 g loading dose, followed by either 0.5 g (for the 48 hours interdialytic time) or 1 g (for the 72 hours interdialytic time) might warrant further investigation for efficacy and safety.
BACKGROUND: OXA-2 is a class D beta-lactamase that confers resistance to penicillins, as well as narrow-spectrum cephalosporins. OXA-2 was recently reported to also possess carbapenem-hydrolysing activity. Here, we describe a KPC-2-encoding Klebsiella pneumoniae isolate that demonstrated reduced susceptibility to ceftazidime and ertapenem due to production of OXA-2. OBJECTIVES: To elucidate the role of OXA-2 production in reduced ceftazidime and ertapenem susceptibility in a K. pneumoniae ST258 clinical isolate. METHODS: MICs were determined by the agar dilution method. WGS was conducted to identify and compare resistance genes between isolates. Expression of KPC-2 was quantified by quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblotting. OXA-2 was expressed in Escherichia coli TOP10, as well as in K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883, to define the relative contribution of OXA-2 in beta-lactam resistance. Kinetic studies were conducted using purified OXA-2 enzyme. RESULTS: K. pneumoniae 1761 belonged to ST258 and carried both blaKPC-2 and blaOXA-2. However, expression of blaKPC-2 was substantially reduced due to an IS1294 insertion in the promoter region. K. pneumoniae 1761, K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 and E. coli TOP10 carrying blaOXA-2-harbouring plasmids showed reduced susceptibility to ertapenem and ceftazidime, but meropenem, imipenem and cefepime were unaffected. blaOXA-2 was carried on a 2910 bp partial class 1 integron containing aacA4-blaOXA-2-qacEDelta1-sul1 on an IncA/C2 plasmid, which was not present in the earlier ST258 isolates possessing blaKPC-2 with intact promoters. Hydrolysis of ertapenem by OXA-2 was confirmed using purified enzyme. CONCLUSIONS: Production of OXA-2 was associated with reduced ceftazidime and ertapenem susceptibility in a K. pneumoniae ST258 isolate.
By using an agar dilution method, the comparative in vitro activities of ertapenem (MK-0826) were studied against 1,001 anaerobes isolated from human intra-abdominal infections in 17 countries worldwide. MK-0826 was uniformly active against all isolates, including all Bacteroides fragilis group species isolates, with the exception of 12 of 61 (20%) strains of Bilophila wadsworthia, 3 strains of lactobacilli, and 1 isolate of Acidaminococcus fermentans. Geographical variation in activity was not observed.
IMPORTANCE: Eravacycline is a novel, fully synthetic fluorocycline antibiotic of the tetracycline class with in vitro activity against clinically important gram-negative, gram-positive aerobic, and facultative bacteria including most of those resistant to cephalosporins, fluoroquinolones, beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitors, multidrug resistant strains and carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, and most anaerobic pathogens. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of eravacycline compared with ertapenem in adult hospitalized patients with complicated intra-abdominal infections (cIAIs). DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a phase III, randomized, double-blind, multicenter study that evaluated the efficacy and safety of eravacycline in comparison with ertapenem in patients with cIAI requiring surgical or percutaneous intervention. The test-of-cure evaluation was conducted 25 to 31 days after the first dose of the study drug and the follow-up visit was conducted 38 to 50 days after the first dose of the study drug. All patients recruited into this study were hospitalized. Five hundred forty-one patients were recruited for this study; 270 patients were randomized to receive eravacycline, and 271 patients were randomized to receive ertapenem. Patients had to meet all of the following criteria: hospitalized for cIAI requiring intervention; 18 years or older; evidence of systemic inflammatory response; pain caused by cIAI; able to provide informed consent; and diagnosis of cIAI with sonogram or radiographic imaging or visual confirmation. Analyses were done in intent-to-treat and evaluable populations. INTERVENTIONS: Patients received eravacycline, 1.0 mg/kg every 12 hours, or ertapenem, 1.0 g every 24 hours, for a minimum of four 24-hour dosing cycles. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Clinical outcome assessments were made at the end of treatment, test of cure, and follow-up visits and were classified as clinical cure, clinical failure, or indeterminate/missing. RESULTS: In total, 541 patients were randomly assigned to treatment: 270 in the eravacycline group and 271 in the ertapenem group. The mean ages were 54.9 years and 55.4 years for the eravacycline and ertapenem groups, respectively. Most patients were white (263 of 270 patients [97.4%] in the eravacycline group and 260 of 271 patients [95.9%] in the ertapenem group). For the microbiological intent-to-treat population, the rates of clinical cure at the test-of-cure visit were 86.8% in the eravacycline group and 87.6% in the ertapenem group. The difference in clinical cure rates between the groups was -0.80% (95% CI, -7.1% to 5.5%), meeting the prespecified noninferiority margin and allowing for statistical noninferiority of eravacycline to ertapenem to be declared for this study. Both study drugs were well tolerated. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Overall, eravacycline demonstrated noninferiority to ertapenem for the treatment of patients with cIAI. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01844856.
OBJECTIVE: The literature has described the interaction between valproic acid and carbapenems. This interaction leads to decreases in plasma concentrations  of valproic acid. The main objectives of this study were  to assess its relevance in clinical practice, to identify variables associated with  increased seizure episode rates, and to analyse the impact of pharmaceutical intervention on avoiding the effects of this interaction. METHOD: An observational retrospective study of inpatients with epilepsy  admitted between 2016 and 2020. Their pharmacological treatment throughout  admission was recorded, and the presence of other interactions  leading to decreased plasma concentrations of valproic acid was reviewed. The  seizure rate during the year prior to admission was compared to that during  the interaction period. For every episode in which the interaction was detected, an intervention was conducted by providing the prescriber with information on  the interaction and suggesting a change of antibiotherapy as well as the  pharmacokinetic monitoring of valproic acid. RESULTS: 37 episodes were included. 58.1% of the patients were male and  median age was 70 years. In total, 56.8% of the patients received meropenem  and 43.2% received ertapenem. The median duration of  concomitant treatment with valproic acid and carbapenem was 4 days. The  incidence rate ratio was 2.60 (95% confidence interval: 1.61-4.21). Thus, this  interaction was associated with a higher seizure rate. A statistically significant  association was found between higher seizure rates and patients treated with  more than one anti-epileptic drug. Hospital pharmacists detected 24 episodes  (64.9%). In total, 17 interventions (70.8%) were accepted and 13  combinations were discontinued. Pharmacokinetic monitoring was conducted in  13 episodes (35.1%) and infratherapeutic levels were found in all of them. CONCLUSIONS: The interaction between valproic acid and meropenem or ertapenem is clinically relevant. It is recommended that this combination should be avoided provided that a viable alternative is available.  Pharmaceutical intervention may contribute to preventing seizures associated with this combination.
IMPORTANCE: Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a debilitating follicular skin disorder in which bacterial colonization is typical. Oral antibiotic efficacy can be unreliable; however, selective intravenous antibiotics, specifically ertapenem, may provide favorable clinical outcomes. OBJECTIVE: To explore optimal course duration, efficacy, and patient satisfaction associated with intravenous ertapenem for HS. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This retrospective review of the medical records of 98 patients with HS between 2018 and 2022 measured and evaluated patient outcomes before and after treatment with intravenous ertapenem. Participants were followed up in a telephone survey assessing patient perspectives and satisfaction. All of those included in this study received medical care from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine's Montefiore HS Center. EXPOSURES: Patients were treated with 1 g of ertapenem that was self-administered at home through a peripheral intravenous central catheter using an elastomeric pump for 12 to 16 weeks. Antiandrogens and immunomodulatory biologic therapies initiated prior to ertapenem were maintained throughout the treatment course. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcomes, encompassing clinical severity (evaluated through the HS Physician Global Assessment score [a 6-point scale ranging from clear to very severe] and a numerical rating scale for pain [an 11-point scale in which a score of 0 indicates no pain and a score of 10 indicates the worst possible pain]) and markers of inflammation (such as leukocytes, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and interleukin-6), were measured at baseline, the midcourse of intravenous ertapenem treatment, at the end of the course, and posttherapy. Bacterial abundance was also examined at these 4 points, and patient satisfaction was assessed during follow-up. RESULTS: A total of 98 patients (mean [SD] age, 35.8 [13.0] years; 61 [62.2%] female) with HS were treated with intravenous ertapenem. The self-reported racial distribution included 3 individuals identifying as Asian (3.1%), 59 as Black/African American (60.2%), 13 as White (13.3%), and 23 as either other or unknown (23.5%). Additionally, 24 participants (24.5%) reported Spanish/Hispanic/Latino ethnicity. The mean (SD) treatment duration spanned 13.1 (4.0) weeks, with posttherapy follow-up occurring after 7.8 (3.6) weeks. From baseline to posttherapy follow-up, significant reductions were found in the mean (SD) HS Physician Global Assessment scores (3.9 [1.0] vs 2.7 [1.2]; P < .001) and the numerical rating scale for pain (4.2 [3.3] vs 1.8 [2.7]; P < .001), C-reactive protein (5.4 [11.4] vs 2.4 [2.0] mg/dL; P < .001), interleukin-6 (25.2 [21.1] vs 13.7 [13.9]; P < .001), and leukocytes (11.34 [3.9] vs 10.0 [3.4]; P < .001). At follow-up, 76 patients (78.0%) participated in the telephone survey, where 63 (80.3%) reported medium to high satisfaction; further, 69 (90.8%) would recommend ertapenem to other patients. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this retrospective review of medical records and telephone survey, treating HS with intravenous ertapenem, administered for a mean of 13 weeks, was associated with improvement in clinical and inflammatory markers, as well as heightened patient satisfaction. Nonetheless, this approach should be monitored for the emergence of antimicrobial resistance given a longer than standard treatment course.
BACKGROUND: Carbapenem antibiotics are considered the treatment of choice for serious extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Gram-negative bacteria (GNB) infections. The study objectives were to evaluate efficacy and safety of de-escalation therapy to ertapenem for treatment of infections caused by extended-spectrum-beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae. METHODS: We conducted a randomized controlled trial of adult patients with documented ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae infections who had received any group 2 carbapenem for less than 96 h. In the intervention group, the previously-prescribed group 2 carbapenem was de-escalated to ertapenem. In the control group, the group 2 carbapenem was continued. RESULTS: During June 2011-December 2014, 32 patients were randomized to the de-escalation group and 34 to the control group. Most common sites of infection were urinary tract infection (42%). Characteristics of both groups were comparable. By using a 15% predefined margin, ertapenem was non-inferior to control group regarding the clinical cure rate (%Delta = 14.0 [95% confidence interval: -2.4 to 31.1]), the microbiological eradication rate (%Delta = 4.1 [-5.0 to 13.4]), and the superimposed infection rate (%Delta = -16.5 [-38.4 to 5.3]). Patients in the de-escalation group had a significantly lower 28-day mortality rate (9.4% vs. 29.4%; P = .05), a significantly shorter median length of stay (16.5 days [4.0-73.25] vs. 20.0 days [1.0-112.25]; P = .04), and a significantly lower defined daily dose of carbapenem use (12.9 +/- 8.9 vs. 18.4 +/- 12.6; P = .05). CONCLUSIONS: Ertapenem could be safely used as de-escalation therapy for ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae infections, once the susceptibility profiles are known. Future studies are needed to investigate ertapenem efficacy against ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae pneumonia to determine its applicability in life-threatening conditions. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01297842 . Registered on 14 February 2011. First patient enrolled on 27 June 2011.
