WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Migraine is a common and costly neurological disorder that affects approximately 1 of every 7 people annually. Pharmacological therapy for prevention of migraine is warranted when patients experience at least 6 headache days, 4 headache days with at least some impairment or 3 headache days with severe impairment or requiring bed rest in a month. Levetiracetam is an antiepileptic drug that has the potential to be beneficial for migraine prophylaxis. The objective of this review was to assess the safety and efficacy of levetiracetam for migraine prophylaxis. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted in MEDLINE (1946-August 2017), EMBASE (1947-August 2017) and CENTRAL using the terms: migraine disorders, migraine, or headache and etiracetam or levetiracetam. Animal studies, case reports, abstracts, letters to the editor and those not written in English were excluded. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Eleven articles were identified for inclusion. Of the studies included, 2 were retrospective chart reviews, 4 were randomized placebo- or active comparator-controlled trials, and the remaining 5 were prospective, open-label studies. All studies found a statistically significant decrease in headache frequency per month compared to baseline or placebo when used for treatment of episodic migraine (2.96-10.9 headache/mo decrease), and 57.9%-100% of patients had at least a 50% decrease in headache frequency from baseline. Significance was not consistently demonstrated in the prophylactic treatment of chronic migraine. The most common adverse effects noted included somnolence, dizziness and behavioural effects but generally did not require discontinuation. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: The studies included in this review indicate that levetiracetam is well-tolerated and may be an alternative treatment option for episodic migraine prophylaxis. Additional clinical evidence is necessary to establish the efficacy of levetiracetam for the prophylactic treatment of chronic migraine.
On occasion of a carotid angiography in man, regional cerebral bloodflow (rCBF) was measured before and after the injection of thiopental 5 mg/kg I.V. A significant decrease of rCBF was found after thiopental, in a previous study, due to a decrease of the brainmetabolism. To study the influence of piracetam and of etiracetam on this decrease of rCBF, 22 patients received intravenously the evening before the investigation 4 g piracetam or 4 g etiracetam or placebo, as well in the morning before the investigation and 30 minutes before the injection of thiopental. Besides the rCBF also other parameters were measured: arterial pressures, cardiac output, heart rate, as well as blood gases, glucose, lactate and pyruvate in the arterial blood and the cerebral venous blood, and blood gases in the mixed venous blood. There was no influence on the decrease of rCBF neither in the piracetam or etiracetam group, compared to the placebogroup. A few scarce minor changes were seen in the other measured parameters.
Nearly three decades have now passed since the discovery of the piracetam-like nootropics, compounds which exhibit cognition-enhancing properties, but for which no commonly accepted mechanism of action has been established. This review covers clinical, pharmacokinetic, biochemical and behavioural results presented in the literature from 1965 through 1992 (407 references) of piracetam, oxiracetam, pramiracetam, etiracetam, nefiracetam, aniracetam and rolziracetam and their structural analogues. The piracetam-like nootropics are capable of achieving reversal of amnesia induced by, e.g., scopolamine, electroconvulsive shock and hypoxia. Protection against barbiturate intoxication is observed and some benefit in clinical studies with patients suffering from mild to moderate degrees of dementia has been demonstrated. No affinity for the alpha 1-, alpha 2-, beta-, muscarinic, 5-hydroxytryptamine-, dopamine, adenosine-A1-, mu-opiate, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) (except for nefiracetam (GABAA)), benzodiazepine and glutamate receptors has been found. The racetams possess a very low toxicity and lack serious side effects. Increased turnover of different neurotransmitters has been observed as well as other biochemical findings, e.g., inhibition of enzymes such as prolylendopeptidase. So far, no generally accepted mechanism of action has, however, emerged. We believe that the effect of the racetams is due to a potentiation of already present neurotransmission and that much evidence points in the direction of a modulated ion flux by, e.g., potentiated calcium influx through non-L-type voltage-dependent calcium channels, potentiated sodium influx through alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor gated channels or voltage-dependent channels or decreases in potassium efflux. Effects on carrier mediated ion transport are also possible.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Regulatory agencies warn about the risk of AKI with levetiracetam use on the basis of information from case reports. We conducted this study to determine whether new levetiracetam use versus nonuse is associated with a higher risk of AKI. DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: This was a population-based retrospective cohort study of adults with epilepsy in Ontario, Canada. Patients who received a new outpatient prescription for levetiracetam between January 1, 2004 and March 1, 2017 were matched to two nonusers on stage of CKD, recorded seizure in the prior 90 days, and logit of a propensity score for levetiracetam use. The primary outcome was a hospital encounter (emergency department visit or hospitalization) with AKI within 30 days of cohort entry. Secondary outcomes were AKI within 180 days and change in the concentration of serum creatinine. We assessed the primary outcome using health care diagnosis codes. We evaluated the change in the concentration of serum creatinine in a subpopulation with laboratory measurements. RESULTS: We matched 3980 levetiracetam users to 7960 nonusers (mean age 55 years, 51% women). Levetiracetam use was not significantly associated with a higher risk of AKI within 30 days (13 [0.33%] events in levetiracetam users and 21 [0.26%] events in nonusers [odds ratio, 1.24; 95% confidence interval, 0.62 to 2.47]). Similarly, there was no significant association with AKI within 180 days (odds ratio, 0.70; 95% confidence interval, 0.43 to 1.13). The change in the concentration of serum creatinine did not significantly differ between levetiracetam users and nonusers. CONCLUSIONS: In this population-based study levetiracetam use was not associated with a higher risk of AKI. PODCAST: This article contains a podcast at https://www.asn-online.org/media/podcast/CJASN/2018_12_11_Yau_Podcast.mp3.
Human brain function as measured by the computer-assisted spectral analyzed electroencephalogram (EEG) shows significant alterations in normal and pathological aging characterized by an increase of delta and theta activity and by a decrease of alpha and alpha-adjacent beta activity as well as by a slowing of the dominant frequency. These changes are indicative of deficits in the vigilance-regulatory systems. By the term vigilance we understand the availability and grade of organization of man's adaptive behavior, which in turn is dependent of the dynamic state of the total neural activity. An impairment of vigilance was found to be significantly correlated with the clinical symptomatology of the organic brain syndrome (OBS) as well as with mnestic performance deficits. Elderly subjects with bad memory exhibit slower activity and less alpha and alpha-adjacent beta activity than those with good memory. This was found to be true for both the time of acquisition and recall. Antihypoxidotic/nootropic drugs, such as the ergotalkaloids dihydroergotoxine and nicergoline, vincamine-alkaloids, piracetam, aniracetam, etiracetam, piridoxilate and others, induce interestingly just oppositional changes in human brain function, thereby improving vigilance. Other methods for proving therapeutic efficacy in man, like experimentally induced hypoxic hypoxidosis and the reversible alcoholic OBS, are discussed.
