Clinical trials frequently include multiple end points that mature at different times. The initial report, typically based on the primary end point, may be published when key planned co-primary or secondary analyses are not yet available. Clinical Trial Updates provide an opportunity to disseminate additional results from studies, published in JCO or elsewhere, for which the primary end point has already been reported.The combined analysis of SOFT-TEXT compared outcomes in 4,690 premenopausal women with estrogen/progesterone receptor-positive (ER/PgR+) early breast cancer randomly assigned to 5 years of exemestane + ovarian function suppression (OFS) versus tamoxifen + OFS. After a median follow-up of 9 years, exemestane + OFS significantly improved disease-free survival (DFS) and distant recurrence-free interval (DRFI), but not overall survival, compared with tamoxifen + OFS. We now report DFS, DRFI, and overall survival after a median follow-up of 13 years. In the intention-to-treat (ITT) population, the 12-year DFS (4.6% absolute improvement, hazard ratio [HR], 0.79; 95% CI, 0.70 to 0.90; P < .001) and DRFI (1.8% absolute improvement, HR, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.70 to 0.98; P = .03), but not overall survival (90.1% v 89.1%, HR, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.78 to 1.11), continued to be significantly improved for patients assigned exemestane + OFS over tamoxifen + OFS. Among patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative tumors (86.0% of the ITT population), the absolute improvement in 12-year overall survival with exemestane + OFS was 2.0% (HR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.70 to 1.04) and 3.3% in those who received chemotherapy (45.9% of the ITT population). Overall survival benefit was clinically significant in high-risk patients, eg, women age < 35 years (4.0%) and those with > 2 cm (4.5%) or grade 3 tumors (5.5%). These sustained reductions of the risk of recurrence with adjuvant exemestane + OFS, compared with tamoxifen + OFS, provide guidance for selecting patients for whom exemestane should be preferred over tamoxifen in the setting of OFS.[Media: see text].
BACKGROUND: Adjuvant therapy with an aromatase inhibitor improves outcomes, as compared with tamoxifen, in postmenopausal women with hormone-receptor-positive breast cancer. METHODS: In two phase 3 trials, we randomly assigned premenopausal women with hormone-receptor-positive early breast cancer to the aromatase inhibitor exemestane plus ovarian suppression or tamoxifen plus ovarian suppression for a period of 5 years. Suppression of ovarian estrogen production was achieved with the use of the gonadotropin-releasing-hormone agonist triptorelin, oophorectomy, or ovarian irradiation. The primary analysis combined data from 4690 patients in the two trials. RESULTS: After a median follow-up of 68 months, disease-free survival at 5 years was 91.1% in the exemestane-ovarian suppression group and 87.3% in the tamoxifen-ovarian suppression group (hazard ratio for disease recurrence, second invasive cancer, or death, 0.72; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.60 to 0.85; P<0.001). The rate of freedom from breast cancer at 5 years was 92.8% in the exemestane-ovarian suppression group, as compared with 88.8% in the tamoxifen-ovarian suppression group (hazard ratio for recurrence, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.55 to 0.80; P<0.001). With 194 deaths (4.1% of the patients), overall survival did not differ significantly between the two groups (hazard ratio for death in the exemestane-ovarian suppression group, 1.14; 95% CI, 0.86 to 1.51; P=0.37). Selected adverse events of grade 3 or 4 were reported for 30.6% of the patients in the exemestane-ovarian suppression group and 29.4% of those in the tamoxifen-ovarian suppression group, with profiles similar to those for postmenopausal women. CONCLUSIONS: In premenopausal women with hormone-receptor-positive early breast cancer, adjuvant treatment with exemestane plus ovarian suppression, as compared with tamoxifen plus ovarian suppression, significantly reduced recurrence. (Funded by Pfizer and others; TEXT and SOFT ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT00066703 and NCT00066690, respectively.).
PURPOSE: Standard-of-care treatment for metastatic hormone receptor-positive (HR(+)), HER2-negative (HER2(-)) breast cancer includes endocrine therapy (ET) combined with a cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor (CDK4/6i). Optimal treatment after progression on CDK4/6i is unknown. The TRINITI-1 trial investigated ribociclib, a CDK4/6i that has recently demonstrated significant overall survival benefit in two phase III trials, in combination with everolimus and exemestane in patients with HR(+), HER2(-) advanced breast cancer (ABC) after progression on a CDK4/6i. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This multicenter, open-label, single-arm, phase I/II study included patients with locally advanced/metastatic HR(+)/HER2(-) breast cancer. The primary endpoint was clinical benefit rate (CBR) at week 24 among patients with ET-refractory disease with progression on a CDK4/6i. Other endpoints included safety and biomarker analysis. RESULTS: Of 104 patients enrolled (phases I and II), 96 had prior CDK4/6i. Recommended phase II doses (all once daily days 1-28 of 28-day cycle) were ribociclib 300 mg, everolimus 2.5 mg, and exemestane 25 mg (group 1) and ribociclib 200 mg, everolimus 5 mg, and exemestane 25 mg (group 2). CBR among 95 efficacy-evaluable patients (phases I and II) at week 24 was 41.1% (95% confidence interval, 31.1-51.6), which met the primary endpoint (predetermined threshold: 10%). Common adverse events included neutropenia (69.2%) and stomatitis (40.4%). No new safety signals were observed; no grade 3/4 QTc prolongation was reported. CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary TRINITI-1 safety and efficacy results support further investigation of CDK4/6 blockade and targeting of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway in patients with ET-refractory HR(+)/HER2(-) ABC after progression on a CDK4/6i.
INTRODUCTION: Effective treatments for hormone-receptor-positive (HR(+)) breast cancer (BC) following relapse/progression on nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor (NSAI) therapy are needed. Initial Breast Cancer Trials of OraL EveROlimus-2 (BOLERO-2) trial data demonstrated that everolimus and exemestane significantly prolonged progression-free survival (PFS) versus placebo plus exemestane alone in this patient population. METHODS: BOLERO-2 is a phase 3, double-blind, randomized, international trial comparing everolimus (10 mg/day) plus exemestane (25 mg/day) versus placebo plus exemestane in postmenopausal women with HR(+) advanced BC with recurrence/progression during or after NSAIs. The primary endpoint was PFS by local investigator review, and was confirmed by independent central radiology review. Overall survival, response rate, and clinical benefit rate were secondary endpoints. RESULTS: Final study results with median 18-month follow-up show that median PFS remained significantly longer with everolimus plus exemestane versus placebo plus exemestane [investigator review: 7.8 versus 3.2 months, respectively; hazard ratio = 0.45 (95% confidence interval 0.38-0.54); log-rank P < 0.0001; central review: 11.0 versus 4.1 months, respectively; hazard ratio = 0.38 (95% confidence interval 0.31-0.48); log-rank P < 0.0001] in the overall population and in all prospectively defined subgroups, including patients with visceral metastases, [corrected] and irrespective of age. The incidence and severity of adverse events were consistent with those reported at the interim analysis and in other everolimus trials. CONCLUSION: The addition of everolimus to exemestane markedly prolonged PFS in patients with HR(+) advanced BC with disease recurrence/progression following prior NSAIs. These results further support the use of everolimus plus exemestane in this patient population. ClinicalTrials.gov #NCT00863655.
BACKGROUND: The BOLERO-2 study previously demonstrated that adding everolimus (EVE) to exemestane (EXE) significantly improved progression-free survival (PFS) by more than twofold in patients with hormone-receptor-positive (HR(+)), HER2-negative advanced breast cancer that recurred or progressed during/after treatment with nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitors (NSAIs). The overall survival (OS) analysis is presented here. PATIENTS AND METHODS: BOLERO-2 is a phase III, double-blind, randomized international trial comparing EVE 10 mg/day plus EXE 25 mg/day versus placebo (PBO) + EXE 25 mg/day in postmenopausal women with HR(+) advanced breast cancer with prior exposure to NSAIs. The primary end point was PFS by local investigator assessment; OS was a key secondary end point. RESULTS: At the time of data cutoff (3 October 2013), 410 deaths had occurred and 13 patients remained on treatment. Median OS in patients receiving EVE + EXE was 31.0 months [95% confidence interval (CI) 28.0-34.6 months] compared with 26.6 months (95% CI 22.6-33.1 months) in patients receiving PBO + EXE (hazard ratio = 0.89; 95% CI 0.73-1.10; log-rank P = 0.14). Poststudy treatments were received by 84% of patients in the EVE + EXE arm versus 90% of patients in the PBO + EXE arm. Types of poststudy therapies were balanced across arms, except for chemotherapy (53% EVE + EXE versus 63% PBO + EXE). No new safety concerns were identified. CONCLUSIONS: In BOLERO-2, adding EVE to EXE did not confer a statistically significant improvement in the secondary end point OS despite producing a clinically meaningful and statistically significant improvement in the primary end point, PFS (4.6-months prolongation in median PFS; P < 0.0001). Ongoing translational research should further refine the benefit of mTOR inhibition and related pathways in this treatment setting. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT00863655.
A sensitive and selective high-performance liquid chromatographic method for the determination of 6-methylen-androsta-1,4-diene-3,17-dione (exemestane) and its 17-dihydro metabolite in human plasma has been developed. The analytes and internal standard (Norgestrel) were extracted from plasma samples with a methylene chloride-iso-octane mixture; the organic phase was dried and the residue was reconstituted with an acetonitrile-water mixture, then analyzed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography. Quantification was achieved by ultraviolet detection of the eluate. The linearity, precision and accuracy of the method were evaluated. No interference from the constituents of human blank plasma was observed. The lower limit of quantification was 10 ng/ml plasma. The suitability of the method for in vivo samples was checked by analysis of plasma samples drawn from healthy male volunteers who had received a 200-mg single oral dose of the test compound.
Exemestane, a 3rd-generation aromatase inhibitor, is clinically used in the treatment of breast cancer in postmenopausal women. The key step of the industrial synthetic process, i.e., a dehydrogenation to introduce the Delta(1)-unsaturation, is normally performed with quinones such as p-chloranil or DDQ. We observed the formation of two different hexacyclic by-products, depending on the quinone used in the oxidation step. These compounds arise from an initial [4+2] cycloaddition between the precursor 6-methylenandrost-4-ene-3,17-dione and the quinone reagent, followed by a twofold dehydrohalogenation (with p-chloranil) or dehydrogenation (with DDQ). The structures of these unprecedented hexacyclic adducts were determined by a combination of mass spectrometry, NMR techniques and crystallographic analysis.
The findings of the Intergroup Exemestane Study (IES) challenge the standard adjuvant endocrine therapy consisting of 5 years of tamoxifen therapy in women with oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. The IES study confirmed that switching to an aromatase inhibitor (AI) such as exemestane after 2-3 years of tamoxifen therapy resulted in improved survival relative to women remaining on 5 years of tamoxifen therapy. Data from IES concur with the findings of other studies with AIs that support the rationale of switching from tamoxifen to an AI after 2-3 years of tamoxifen in postmenopausal women who remain disease-free.
The landscape of cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor (CDK4/6i) resistance is still being elucidated and the optimal subsequent therapy to overcome resistance remains uncertain. Here we present the final results of a phase Ib/IIa, open-label trial (NCT02871791) of exemestane plus everolimus and palbociclib for CDK4/6i-resistant metastatic breast cancer. The primary objective of phase Ib was to evaluate safety and tolerability and determine the maximum tolerated dose/recommended phase II dose (100 mg palbociclib, 5 mg everolimus, 25 mg exemestane). The primary objective of phase IIa was to determine the clinical benefit rate (18.8%, n = 6/32), which did not meet the predefined endpoint (65%). Secondary objectives included pharmacokinetic profiling (phase Ib), objective response rate, disease control rate, duration of response, and progression free survival (phase IIa), and correlative multi-omics analysis to investigate biomarkers of resistance to CDK4/6i. All participants were female. Multi-omics data from the phase IIa patients (n = 24 tumor/17 blood biopsy exomes; n = 27 tumor transcriptomes) showed potential mechanisms of resistance (convergent evolution of HER2 activation, BRAF(V600E)), identified joint genomic/transcriptomic resistance features (ESR1 mutations, high estrogen receptor pathway activity, and a Luminal A/B subtype; ERBB2/BRAF mutations, high RTK/MAPK pathway activity, and a HER2-E subtype), and provided hypothesis-generating results suggesting that mTOR pathway activation correlates with response to the trial's therapy. Our results illustrate how genome and transcriptome sequencing may help better identify patients likely to respond to CDK4/6i therapies.
The objective of the present study was to formulate and optimize exemestane (EXM) encapsulated vitamin E-TPGS-poly-varepsilon-caprolactone based polymeric nanoparticles (TPGS-PCLNPs) for enhancing its anticancer efficacy. The 2(3) factorial design was employed to investigate the combined influence of formulation and process variables on properties of TPGS-PCLNPs, prepared by nanoprecipitation method. The physicochemical characterization revealed the encapsulation of EXM in amorphous form without any interaction inside spherical shaped TPGS-PCLNPs. In vitro cytotoxicity study on MCF-7 breast cancer cells exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity of EXM by encapsulating in TPGS-PCLNPs. The TPGS-PCLNPs can serve as potential delivery vehicle for EXM to improve its therapeutic efficacy.
In this study, we present a case of falsely elevated oestradiol (E(2)) concentration, determined by two immunoassays, in a breast cancer patient receiving exemestane therapy. The positive bias of immunochemical measurements was revealed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry which showed undetectable E(2) concentration. The discrepancy is expected to be a consequence of the structural resemblance of E(2) and exemestane sharing the same steroidal backbone. Inaccurate laboratory findings in therapy monitoring, as in this case, may lead to unnecessary changes of therapy.
Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are anti-tumor agents used in clinic to treat hormone-dependent breast cancer. AIs block estrogens biosynthesis by inhibiting the enzyme aromatase, preventing tumor progression. Exemestane, a third-generation steroidal AI, belongs to this class of drugs and is currently used in clinic to treat postmenopausal women, due to its high efficacy and good tolerability. Here, its pharmacological and biological aspects as well as its clinical applications and comparison to other endocrine therapeutic agents, are reviewed. It is also focused the benefits and risks of exemestane, drawbacks to be overcome and aspects to be explored.
RATIONALE: Within a rapidly expanding therapeutic armamentarium, the combination of everolimus (Eve) plus exemestane (Exe) utility needs to be reinstated in hormone receptor positive (HR+), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 negative (HER2-) metastatic breast cancer (MBC). PATIENT CONCERNS: We herein report on a patient affected by HR+ HER2- MBC treated with radical surgery after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, who relapsed early on adjuvant tamoxifen, progressed rapidly on first line anastrozole, and failed treatment with third line capecitabine. DIAGNOSES: Metastatic luminal breast cancer progressed under standard endocrine therapy and chemotherapy. INTERVENTIONS: Third line with Eve plus Exe was given after chemotherapy. OUTCOMES: Patient experienced a 5-year progression free interval. LESSONS: Eve plus Exe remains a valid option in HR+HER2- MBC.
INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer (BC) is the most common type of cancer diagnosed among women worldwide with an estimated 2.3 million new cases every year. Almost two-thirds of all patients with BC have estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) tumors. In this review, the clinical evidence of exemestane in different treatment settings in ER+ BC is presented and summarized. SEARCH STRATEGY: A search strategy with the keywords "breast cancer [MeSH Terms]" AND "exemestane [Title/Abstract]" was devised and a search was performed in PubMed. RESULTS: The efficacy of exemestane in different treatment settings has been established by numerous clinical studies. Exemestane is recommended as an adjuvant treatment in postmenopausal women previously treated with tamoxifen in trials comparing 5 years of tamoxifen with 2-3 years of tamoxifen combined with 2-3 years of exemestane, which proved that treatment with exemestane provided better survival outcomes. Similarly, exemestane could be considered as a safe treatment option for neoadjuvant treatment, prevention of chemotherapy, and treatment of advanced BC either alone or in combination with other targeted therapy drugs in both pre- and postmenopausal women. CONCLUSION: Exemestane could be considered as a reasonable therapeutic option in the treatment of ER+ BC at any stage in pre- and postmenopausal women.
Desmoid tumors are rare mesenchymal neoplasms without metastatic potential. Despite the benign nature of this condition, some patients develop disease progression despite all locoregional options for care. Aggressive forms of desmoid tumors may induce morbidity that can lead to physical impairment and mortality that is occasionally observed as a result of local infiltrative growth and tissue invasion, in particular with abdominal disease. Few therapeutic options are available for patients with recurrent/unresectable desmoid tumors. Several studies have suggested the potential benefit of antiestrogens such as tamoxifen in this setting. Here we report the first description of the efficacy of an aromatase inhibitor in a patient with a desmoid tumor.
The role of therapies in the management of breast cancer is continuously changing. As research and development furthers, newer and more effective treatments are beginning to take the lead in cancer care, changing the role of tamoxifen.
Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are the treatment of choice for hormone receptor-positive early breast cancer in postmenopausal women. None of the third-generation AIs are superior to the others in terms of efficacy. We attempted to identify genetic factors that could differentiate between the effectiveness of adjuvant anastrozole and exemestane by examining single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-treatment interaction in 4,465 patients. A group of SNPs were found to be differentially associated between anastrozole and exemestane regarding outcomes. However, they showed no association with outcome in the combined analysis. We followed up common SNPs near LY75 and GPR160 that could differentiate anastrozole from exemestane efficacy. LY75 and GPR160 participate in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and growth pathways, in both cases with SNP-dependent variation in regulation. Collectively, these studies identified SNPs that differentiate the efficacy of anastrozole and exemestane and they suggest additional genetic biomarkers for possible use in selecting an AI for a given patient.
Neoadjuvant endocrine therapy (NET) for hormone receptor-positive (HR+) breast cancer might be as effective as chemotherapy, with a better toxicity profile. Blocking a crucial process such as angiogenesis with sunitinib may have a synergistic effect with NET. We aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of neoadjuvant sunitinib plus exemestane in early-stage HR+/HER2-negative breast cancer. In this phase I/II study, postmenopausal women with HR+/HER2- stage II-III breast cancer received neoadjuvant exemestane at conventional dose of 25mg plus sunitinib in a 3 + 3 design at 25mg (3/1weeks scheme) or 37.5mg continuous dose, for 6 months. Coprimary endpoints were the recommended dose of sunitinib combined with exemestane and objective response. Secondary endpoints included safety and biomarkers of early response. For 15 months, 18 patients were enrolled, 15 at sunitinib 25mg and 3 at 37.5mg. Median age was 73, 77% of patients had T2 tumors and 67% node-positive disease. The most common grade 2 toxicity was asthenia (44%), as was hypertension (22%) for grade 3. No grade 4-5 were reported. Twelve patients (66%) achieved an objective response. VEGFR-2 levels significantly decreased after one month of treatment. Differential gene expression analysis showed downregulation of ESR1, PGR and NAT1 in post-treatment samples and upregulation of EGFR, MYC, SFRP1, and FOXC1. PAM50 analysis on 83% of patients showed a prevalence of luminal A subtype, both in pre-treatment (63.6%) and post-treatment tumors (54.5%). Sunitinib plus exemestane was associated with substantial yet reversible toxicities, providing safety, efficacy and biological impact insights of combining an antiangiogenic drug with hormone therapy in early-stage breast cancer.Trial registration: Registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT00931450. 02/07/2009.
