Famotidine (FMT) is an orally administered histamine H2-receptor blocker with limited bioavailability since it exhibits low solubility and low permeability. In addition, the recent withdrawal of ranitidine from the market, makes famotidine an interesting candidate to obtain solid forms with improved pharmacokinetic performance. In this work, crystal engineering concepts and the co-amorphous formation strategy were applied to obtain two novel solids. Crystalline famotidine malate (FMT-MT) and a vitreous phase (FMT-MTa) were prepared by solvent evaporation and mechanochemical synthesis, respectively. FMT-MT (monoclinic, S.G. P2(1)/n) crystallizes with one FMT and one co-former molecules in the asymmetric unit forming a (R228) structural motif. FMT-MT resulted in a salt by proton transfer from one malic carboxylic group to the guanidine moiety of FMT. The three-dimensional packing is described as undulating layers of alternated FMT(+) and MT(-) running along the a direction. FMT-MTa shows the inherent features of amorphous phases according to powder X-ray diffraction and DSC analysis. The higher physical stability was found for amorphous samples maintained at 4  degrees C up to 60 days. The solubility assays in water, indicate that FMT-MT and FMT-MTa are 2.02 and 2.68-fold more soluble than the marketed polymorph, whereas similar values were obtained in simulated gastric fluid.
A method has been designed based on gas chromatography with flame ionization detection (FID) for the separation and analyses of ranitidine, famotidine and metformin after pre-column derivatization with trifluoroacetylacetone and ethyl chloroformate. DB-1 (30 m x 0.32 mm id) column with film thickness 0.25 mum was used for the separation at an initial temperature of column was 100 degrees C for 2 min, and ramping at 20 degrees C/min up to 250 degrees C, with a hold time of 3 min. The rate of nitrogen flow was 2.5 mL/min and FID was used for detection. Complete separation was obtained between all the three drugs including excess of derivatization reagents. Linear calibration curves and detection limits were obtained in the ranges 0.1-30 mug/mL and 0.011-0.015 mug/mL. The procedure was repeatable in terms of peak heights/peak areas and retention time (n = 5) for derivatization, quantitation and separation with relative standard deviations (RSDs) within 2.0-3.0%. The approach was examined for the analyses of drug products and serum after the intake of the drugs by healthy volunteers, and recoveries were obtained within 95-98% with RSDs 2.4-3.1%.
Indomethacin is one of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) that are widely prescribed drug for pain and inflammation. However, its notoriety of causing gastrointestinal effect, low water solubility, and its short half-life would affect patient compliance and its oral absorption and accordingly justify the need to develop a formula with a controlled and sustained release manner in combination with anti-ulcer drugs. Herein, we synthesized indomethacin-paracetamol co-drug loaded in nanoemulsion and encapsulated in famotiditine loaded polycaprolactone (PCL) nanoparticles. The synthesis of the co-drug was achieved by the formation of a hydrolyzable ester between the indomethacin and paracetamol. The synthesized co-drug was preloading in nanoemulsion (Co-NE), which encapsulated into famotidine PCL nanoparticles utilizing the nanoprecipitation approach. The developed nanosystem showed hydrodynamic size less than 200 nm and the zeta potential value above -30 mV. TEM images confirmed the morphological structure of the formed nanoemulsion and the loaded PCL nanoparticles. Stability studies revealed that the developed nanosystem was stable at different temperatures and pHs over 1 month. Moreover, improvement of the solubilities of these three drugs leading to have a controlled-release multicomponent system of both co-drug and famotidine over 3 days. This multicomponent nanoparticle might be a potential platform to overcome the obstacles of NSAIDs, synergize drugs with different mechanisms of actions by co-encapsulating a small-sized nanoemulsion into PCL nanoparticles for reaching the goal of effective anti-inflammatory therapy.
To characterize and compare acid suppression (pharmacodynamics) and pharmacokinetics of IV famotidine and ranitidine in critically ill children at risk for stress gastritis. Single-blind, randomized study in PICU patients 6 months to 18 years requiring mechanical ventilation with continuous gastric pH monitoring, randomized to IV famotidine 12 mg/m(2) or ranitidine 60 mg/m(2) when gastric pH < 4.0 >1 hour with serial blood sampling following first dose. Twenty-four children randomized to either famotidine (n = 12) or ranitidine (n = 12). Sixteen out of twenty-four completed both PK and PD study arms (7/12 famotidine; 4.7 +/- 3.4 years; 9/12 ranitidine; 6.6 +/- 4.7 years; p = 0.38). Time to gastric pH 4.0 and total time pH above 4.0 similar with no difference in pH at 6 and 12 hours (p > 0.2). No difference between drugs in clearance, volume of distribution and half-life (p > 0.05). Ratio of AUC pH to AUC drug concentration 0-12 hours after first dose was significantly greater for famotidine (0.06849 +/- 0.01460 SD) than ranitidine (0.02453 +/- 0.01448; p < 0.001) demonstrating greater potency of famotidine. pH lowering efficacy of both drugs is similar. Greater potency of famotidine may offer clinical advantage due to lower drug exposure and less frequent dosing to achieve same pH lowering effect.
OBJECTIVES: This is an investigation of the efficacy and safety of famotidine, a selective histamine H2 receptor antagonist, on improvement of cognitive impairment, depression and anxiety symptoms developing post-COVID-19, in a 12-week, randomized controlled trial. METHODS: A total of 50 patients with a confirmed diagnosis of COVID-19 and a score </= 23 on the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) test or a score </= 22 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) were randomly assigned to either the famotidine (40 mg twice daily) or the placebo group. Changes in MMSE scores at weeks 6 and 12 were the primary outcome, while changes in other scales were the secondary outcomes. Participants and evaluators were blinded. RESULTS: At weeks 6 and 12, patients in the famotidine group had significantly higher MMSE scores (p = 0.014, p < 0.001, respectively). Regarding the MoCA scale, the famotidine group had a significantly higher score at weeks 6 and 12 (p = 0.001, p < 0.001, respectively). Considering the HAM-D scale (Hamilton Depression Rating Scale), at weeks 6 and 12, the famotidine group experienced a larger reduction (p = 0.009, p = 0.02, respectively). Additionally, comparison of the HAM-A scale scores (Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale) at weeks 6 and 12 showed a statistically significant larger reduction in the famotidine group (p = 0.04, p = 0.02, respectively). The two groups did not differ in the frequency of adverse effects. CONCLUSION: Our study supports safety and efficacy of famotidine in treating cognitive impairment, depression and anxiety symptoms induced by COVID-19. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial was registered at the Iranian registry of clinical trials (IRCT: www.irct.ir; registration number: IRCT20090117001556N138).
BACKGROUND: Famotidine was reported to potentially provide benefits to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) patients. However, it remains controversial whether it is effective in treating COVID-19. AIMS: This study aimed to explore whether famotidine use is associated with reduced risk of the severity, death, and intubation for COVID-19 patients. METHODS: This study was registered on International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) (ID: CRD42020213536). A comprehensive search was performed to identify relevant studies up to October 2020. I-squared statistic and Q-test were utilized to assess the heterogeneity. Pooled risk ratios (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated through the random effects or fixed effects model according to the heterogeneity. Subgroup analyses, sensitivity analysis, and publication bias assessment were also conducted. RESULTS: Five studies including 36,635 subjects were included. We found that famotidine use was associated with a statistically non-significant reduced risk of progression to severe disease, death, and intubation for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) patients (pooled RR was 0.82, 95% CI = 0.52-1.30, P = 0.40). CONCLUSION: Famotidine has no significant protective effect in reducing the risk of developing serious illness, death, and intubation for COVID-19 patients. More original studies are needed to further clarify whether it is associated with reduced risk of the severity, death, and intubation for COVID-19 patients.
Use of agents to suppress gastric acid secretion is common among patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. The aims of this open-label, three-period, fixed-sequence study were to evaluate the effect of famotidine and pantoprazole on the pharmacokinetics and safety of elbasvir/grazoprevir fixed-dose combination (FDC) in 16 healthy subjects. Elbasvir and grazoprevir each exhibited similar pharmacokinetics following single-dose administration of elbasvir/grazoprevir with or without famotidine or pantoprazole. Geometric mean ratios (GMRs) of grazoprevir AUC(0,infinity), C(max) , and C(24) (elbasvir/grazoprevir + famotidine or elbasvir/grazoprevir + pantoprazole vs. elbasvir/grazoprevir) ranged from 0.89-1.17. Similarly, GMRs of elbasvir AUC(0,infinity), C(max) , and C(24) (elbasvir/grazoprevir + famotidine or elbasvir/grazoprevir + pantoprazole vs. elbasvir/grazoprevir) ranged from 1.02-1.11. These results indicate that gastric acid-reducing agents do not modify the pharmacokinetics of elbasvir or grazoprevir in a clinically relevant manner and may be coadministered with elbasvir/grazoprevir in HCV-infected patients without restriction.
A fixed-dose combination of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) ibuprofen and the histamine H(2) receptor antagonist famotidine (ibuprofen/famotidine; DUEXIS((R))) is now available for the symptomatic treatment of arthritic symptoms and to reduce the risk of upper gastrointestinal (GI) ulcers in patients who require ibuprofen therapy. The gastroprotective efficacy of oral ibuprofen/famotidine 800/26.6 mg three times daily in patients requiring NSAID therapy for inflammatory conditions and/or pain was evaluated in two 24-week, well-designed trials (REDUCE-1 and -2). According to the post-adjudication analysis of these studies, ibuprofen/famotidine significantly reduced the life table estimated rate of gastric ulcers (primary endpoint of REDUCE-1) but not upper GI ulcers (i.e. gastric or duodenal ulcers) [primary endpoint of REDUCE-2] compared with ibuprofen alone. When life table estimated rates of secondary endpoints were assessed, significantly fewer recipients of the fixed-dose combination than of ibuprofen alone developed upper GI ulcers or duodenal ulcers in REDUCE-1, whereas the between-group difference in gastric ulcers and duodenal ulcers was considered to be nonsignificant in REDUCE-2 because of hierarchical testing. However, in a prespecified pooled analysis of REDUCE-1 and -2, the rate of upper GI ulcers as well as each of the upper GI ulcer components was significantly lower with ibuprofen/famotidine than with ibuprofen. Ibuprofen/famotidine was generally well tolerated, with a tolerability profile consistent with those established for the individual agents.
Famotidine is a highly selective histamine H2-receptor antagonist. In healthy volunteers and patients with acid hypersecretory disease it is approximately 20 to 50 times more potent at inhibiting gastric acid secretion than cimetidine and 8 times more potent than ranitidine on a weight basis. As shown in placebo-controlled trials, famotidine is effective in healing both duodenal and gastric ulcers. Famotidine 20mg twice daily or 40mg at bedtime achieves healing rates and symptom relief similar or superior to those achieved by cimetidine 800mg daily or ranitidine 300mg daily in patients with peptic ulcer disease. Results of 1 placebo-controlled study suggest that famotidine prevents recurrence of duodenal ulcer, but comparative trials are needed to establish its relative efficacy in maintenance therapy. The few non-comparative trials conducted to date also suggest that famotidine 10 to 20mg twice daily may be effective in the treatment of gastritis and reflux gastro-oesophagitis. In comparative trials, famotidine was similar in efficacy to cimetidine in the treatment of upper gastrointestinal bleeding and to ranitidine in the prevention of pulmonary aspiration of acid. In patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, the potency and long duration of action of famotidine may confer an advantage over other H2-receptor antagonists--in individualised doses (mean 0.33 g/day) famotidine successfully controlled acid secretion for up to 72 months in 1 study of such patients. Accumulated clinical evidence confirms that famotidine is very well tolerated and is free of the antiandrogenic effects infrequently reported with cimetidine. Moreover, famotidine is not associated with altered hepatic metabolism of drugs. Thus, famotidine is an effective, well-tolerated alternative to cimetidine and ranitidine. Famotidine is also promising as maintenance therapy for preventing recurrence of duodenal ulcer and as initial or maintenance treatment of gastric hypersecretory disorders, but further clinical experience, particularly in the long term, is needed to define the relative efficacy and tolerability of famotidine in these indications.
The gastroretentive dosage form of famotidine was modified using tamarind seed powders to prolong the gastric retention time. Tamarind seeds were used in two different forms having different swelling and gelling properties: with husk (TSP) or without husk (TKP). TKP (TKP1 to TKP 6) and TSP (TSP1 to TSP 6) series were prepared using tamarind powder:xanthan in the ratios of 5:0, 4:1, 3:2, 2:3, 1:4, 0:5, respectively. The matrix tablets were prepared by the wet granulation method and evaluated for pharmacopoeial requirements. TKP2 was the optimum formulation as it had a short floating lag time (FLT<30 s) and more than 98.5% drug release in 12 h. The dissolution data were fitted to popular mathematical models to assess the mechanism of drug release, and the optimum formulation showed a predominant first order release and diffusion mechanism. It was concluded that the TKP2 prepared using tamarind kernel powder:xanthan (4:1) was the optimum formulation with shortest floating lag time and more than 90% release in the determined period of time.
Arthritis affects nearly 50 million people in the USA and, with the aging of the population, the prevalence is expected to rise. While NSAIDs are very effective in relieving pain associated with osteoarthritis (OA) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), they are associated with side effects, including gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity, which may manifest as dyspepsia, ulcers and/or bleeding. A number of approaches have been employed in an effort to either completely avoid or reduce the risk of GI toxicities associated with NSAID use. Two new products combining an NSAID with a gastroprotective agent have recently been approved and other agents are in the pipeline. Patient adherence to prescribed gastroprotective therapy is known to be poor, often resulting in an increased risk of GI events in patients taking NSAIDs. These newer combination products may fulfill an important need for many patients who need to receive NSAIDs for the pain of OA and RA, but who are also at risk of upper GI events. This article reviews preclinical and clinical results for a new fixed-dose combination of ibuprofen and famotidine, DUEXIS((R)) (HZT-501), which has recently been approved in the USA for the relief of signs and symptoms of RA and OA and to decrease the risk of developing upper GI ulcers.
Gastrointestinal tract disorders constitute a heavy burden to healthcare providers. To eradicate Helicobacter pylori infection, different triple therapy protocols have been proposed. Among which are combinations of proton pump inhibitors (e.g., omeprazole), histamine-2 receptor antagonists (e.g., famotidine), along with antibiotics (e.g., amoxicillin). In this work, a sensitive and accurate high-performance thin-layer chromatographic method was developed for the simultaneous determination of amoxicillin, metronidazole, and famotidine in bulk powder and laboratory-prepared combined-tablet mixtures. Complete separation of the cited compounds was achieved using pre-coated silica gel plates with a mixture of methanol:chloroform:toluene:water:glacial acetic acid (5:2:1.5:0.5:0.1 v/v/v/v/v) as the mobile phase. The method was fully validated as per the international conference of harmonization guidelines. Good linearity, a correlation coefficient of 0.9991, was obtained in the concentration ranges 0.1-1.6 mug/band (amoxicillin), 0.1-0.9 mug/band (metronidazole), and 0.1-0.9 mug/band (famotidine). Since the method allowed the determination of the three compounds in combined tablets with a high degree of selectivity, accuracy, precision, with cost-effectiveness, it could be used for regular quality control. Moreover, the applicability of the proposed method was extended to the determination of the ternary mixture in simulated gastric juice. Method greenness was assessed using different green metrics.
In the present study, grafting technology has been used to develop novel grafted hydrogel beads as controlled drug delivery carriers. The chemical crosslinking and grafting of polyacrylamide onto sodium alginate has been found to be efficient method for the development of new polymeric carrier. The successful crosslinking has been confirmed by Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy, thermogravimetric analysis, and elemental analysis. The polymeric network of sodium alginate-co-polyacrylamide (NaAlg-g-PAM) has been interlinked by covalent and hydrogen bonds which also strength the gel network. Simple ionotropic gelation method has been used for the preparation of NaAlg-g-PAM hydrogel beads. Its swelling and gelation were dependent on monomer and crosslinker concentrations. Entrapment of the drug moiety (famotidine; an antiulcer drug) within the grafted beads has been confirmed by X-ray powder diffraction and differential scanning calorimetry. More than 75% of drug loading in beads occurred with the increase of monomer and crosslinker concentration. In vitro drug release was found to be sustained up to the 12 h with 80% drug release.
We designed a study to evaluate the stability and compatibility of anakinra (recombinant human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist) with cimetidine hydrochloride or famotidine in 0.9% sodium chloride injection during a 4-h period at room temperature (22 degrees C) and light. Anakinra was diluted in 0.9% sodium chloride to concentrations of 4 and 36 mg/ml. At each concentration, anakinra was mixed with 3 mg/ml cimetidine or with 1 mg/ml famotidine, in a 50:50 proportion and stored in plastic culture vials with polypropylene caps. The mean concentrations of anakinra, cimetidine hydrochloride, and famotidine exceeded 95% of initial concentrations throughout the study. No changes were noted in the physical appearance, pH, or the chromatograms during the study period. Thus, anakinra appears to be stable and compatible with cimetidine hydrochloride or famotidine when diluted into 0.9% sodium chloride injection for 4 h at ambient room temperature and light.
We conducted a double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial comparing the efficacy of famotidine 40 mg administered at bedtime (HS), 20 mg given twice daily (BID), and placebo to relieve heartburn and to heal endoscopically documented esophageal erosions or ulcerations. A total of 338 patients were randomized: 135 to receive famotidine 40 mg HS, 137 to receive famotidine 20 mg BID, and 66 to receive placebo. In the group given famotidine 20 mg BID, there was a significantly greater proportion of patients with complete relief of daytime heartburn, and both famotidine groups demonstrated statistically significant advantages over placebo in global scores or by successful outcome. Antacid consumption was significantly reduced in the group given famotidine 20 mg BID as compared with placebo. Both famotidine regimens resulted in a significantly greater proportion of patients with complete endoscopic healing than placebo, with the BID dosing being numerically superior to the 40-mg HS dose.
Famotidine, an antiulcer drug belonging to the H(2) antagonists class of pharmacological agents, was recently shown to potently inhibit human (h) and bacterial carbonic anhydrases (CAs, EC 4.2.1.1). We investigated the inhibitory effects of famotidine against all classes of CAs from the pathogenic bacteria Vibrio cholerae, Burkholderia pseudomallei and Mycobacterium tuberculosis Rv3273 beta-CA, as well as the CAs from the nonpathogenic bacteria/cyanobacteria Sulfurihydrogenibium yellowstonensis, S. azorense, Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis, Colwellia psychrerythraea and Nostoc commune. The delta- and zeta-CAs from the diatom Thalassiosira weissflogii, the fungal enzymes from Cryptococcus neoformans, Candida glabrata and Malassezia globosa, as well as the protozoan enzymes from Trypanosoma cruzi and Plasmodium falciparum, were also investigated. Anopheles gambiae beta-CA was also investigated. All these enzymes were effectively inhibited by famotidine, with affinities between the low nanomolar to the micromolar range. The best inhibition was observed against C. glabrata beta-CA and TweCAzeta, with K(I)s ranging between 13.6 and 22.1 nM.
