BACKGROUND: Findings from cardiovascular outcome trials suggest that fenofibrate therapy may reduce the progression of diabetic retinopathy. METHODS: We recruited and followed adults with nonreferable diabetic retinopathy or maculopathy using the national Diabetic Eye Screening (DES) program in Scotland. We randomly assigned participants to receive 145-mg fenofibrate tablets or placebo (taken daily or, in those with impaired renal function, on alternate days). The primary outcome was a composite of developing referable diabetic retinopathy or maculopathy (based on Scotland's DES grading scheme) or treatment (intravitreal injection, retinal laser, vitrectomy) for retinopathy or maculopathy. RESULTS: A total of 1151 participants were randomly assigned to treatment. During a median of 4.0 years, progression to referable diabetic retinopathy or maculopathy, or treatment thereof, occurred in 131 (22.7%) of 576 participants in the fenofibrate group and 168 (29.2%) of 575 in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.73; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.58 to 0.91; P=0.006). In the fenofibrate group compared with the placebo group, the frequencies for any progression of retinopathy or maculopathy were 185 (32.1%) vs. 231 (40.2%); hazard ratio, 0.74; 95% CI, 0.61 to 0.90 and for the development of macular edema were 22 (3.8%) vs. 43 (7.5%); hazard ratio, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.30 to 0.84. Seventeen (3.0%) participants assigned fenofibrate and 28 (4.9%) assigned placebo were given treatment for retinopathy (hazard ratio, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.31 to 1.06). There was no effect on visual function, quality of life, or visual acuity. Trial-averaged estimated glomerular filtration rate was 7.9 (95% CI, 6.8 to 9.1) ml/min/1.73 m(2) lower in participants in the fenofibrate group compared with the placebo group. Serious adverse events occurred in 208 (36.1%) participants allocated fenofibrate and 204 (35.5%) participants allocated placebo. CONCLUSIONS: Fenofibrate reduced progression of diabetic retinopathy compared with placebo among participants with early retinal changes. (Funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03439345; ISRCTN number, ISRCTN15073006.).
Photosensitization to lipid-lowering fibric acid derivatives are rare. We report a case of photoallergy induced by fenofibrate, proved by a positive UVA photo-patch-test. Evolution towards persistent photosensitization is probable, since photobiological abnormalities persisted during four months after fenofibrate was discontinued. The fact that patch-tests to various benzophenones were negative is not in favour of the benzophenone group being responsible for the photosensitization reaction.
Dyslipidemia is one of the major cardiovascular risk factors, but beyond statin treatment-which represents the cornerstone of therapy-a relevant practical uncertainty regards the use of fibrate derivatives. In the lack of successful results from the main cardiovascular trials, guidelines recommend the use of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists in selected cases, i.e. patients with true atherogenic dyslipidemia. However, recent observations indicate that fenofibrate treatment may provide a reliable complementary support against residual cardiovascular risk. We therefore summarize current evidence on fenofibrate, seeking to provide an updated interpretation of recent studies in the field.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that dysregulation of autophagy is involved in the development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Transcription factors E3 (TFE3) and EB (TFEB) are master regulators of the transcriptional response of basic cellular processes such as lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy. Here, we investigated the role of fenofibrate, a PPARalpha agonist, in promotion of intracellular lipid clearance by upregulation of TFEB/TFE3. METHODS: We investigated whether the effects of fenofibrate on livers were dependent on TFEB in high fat diet (HFD)-fed mice and in vivo Tfeb knockdown mice. These mice were analyzed for characteristics of obesity and diabetes; the effects of fenofibrate on hepatic fat content, glucose sensitivity, insulin resistance, and autophagy functional dependence on TFEB were investigated. HepG2, Hep3B, TSC2(+/+) and tsc2(-/-) MEFs, tfeb wild type- and tfeb knockout-HeLa cells were used for in vitro experiments. RESULTS: Fenofibrate treatment activated autophagy and TFEB/TFE3 and reduced hepatic fat accumulation in an mTOR-independent manner. Knockdown of TFEB offset the effects of fenofibrate on autophagy and hepatic fat accumulation. In addition, fenofibrate treatment induced lysosomal Ca(2+) release through mucolipin 1, activated calcineurin and the CaMKKbeta-AMPK-ULK1 pathway, subsequently promoted TFEB and TFE3 dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation. Treatment with calcium chelator or knockdown of mucolipin 1 in hepatocytes offset the effects of fenofibrate treatment on autophagy and hepatic fat accumulation. CONCLUSION: Activation of PPARalpha ameliorates hepatic fat accumulation via activation of TFEB and lipophagy induction. Lysosomal calcium signaling appears to play a critical role in this process. In addition, activation of TFEB by modulating nuclear receptors including PPARalpha with currently available drugs or new molecules might be a therapeutic target for treatment of NAFLD and other cardiometabolic diseases.
Fenofibrate represents the most commonly used fibric acid derivative. The drug exerts its metabolic effects by modulating the expression of several genes involved in lipoprotein metabolism. In addition, numerous studies suggest that fenofibrate may also affect the progression of the atherosclerotic process by several lipid-independent mechanisms. This review considers the clinical pharmacology of fenofibrate and the current evidence on the pleiotropic effects of this fibric acid derivative.
