OBJECTIVES: This narrative review summarizes literature on pharmaceutical fentanyl's absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion patterns to inform research on illicitly manufactured fentanyl (IMF). RESULTS: Fentanyl is highly lipophilic, lending itself to rapid absorption by highly perfused tissues (including the brain) before redistributing from these tissues to muscle and fat. Fentanyl is eliminated primarily by metabolism and urinary excretion of metabolites (norfentanyl and other minor metabolites). Fentanyl has a long terminal elimination, with a documented secondary peaking phenomenon that can manifest as "fentanyl rebound." Clinical implications in overdose (respiratory depression, muscle rigidity, and "wooden chest syndrome") and opioid use disorder treatment (subjective effects, withdrawal, and buprenorphine-precipitated withdrawal) are discussed. The authors highlight research gaps derived from differences in medicinal fentanyl studies and IMF use patterns, including that medicinal fentanyl studies are largely conducted with persons who were opioid-naive, anesthetized, or had severe chronic pain and that IMF use is characterized by supratherapeutic doses and frequent and sustained administration patterns, as well as adulteration with other substances and/or fentanyl analogs. CONCLUSIONS: This review reexamines information yielded from decades of medicinal fentanyl research and applies elements of the pharmacokinetic profile to persons with IMF exposure. In persons who use drugs, peripheral accumulation of fentanyl may be leading to prolonged exposure. More focused research on the pharmacology of fentanyl in persons using IMF is warranted.
This study was undertaken to determine if metabolites of fentanyl might be useful in the detection and monitoring of substance abuse. The presence of fentanyl and two of its metabolites in the urine and saliva of seven female patients receiving small doses (110 +/- 56 micrograms) of fentanyl was studied up to 96 h from the time of administration. Fentanyl and its two metabolites (norfentanyl and despropionylfentanyl) were extracted from samples and analyzed by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. Unchanged fentanyl was detectable in urine in all patients immediately postoperatively and in 3 of 7 patients at 24 h. By 72 h, fentanyl was undetectable. Norfentanyl was present in larger quantities than fentanyl immediately postoperatively and was detected in all patients at 48 h and in 4 of 7 patients at 96 h. Despropionylfentanyl was not detected in any of the urine specimens tested. Neither fentanyl nor its metabolites could be detected consistently at any time in saliva. Saliva testing does not appear to be a viable alternative to urine testing based on this study. Urinary norfentanyl might be considered as the substance of choice when testing for fentanyl abuse.
Fentanyl is a key therapeutic, used in anaesthesia and pain management. It is also increasingly used illicitly and is responsible for a large and growing number of opioid overdose deaths, especially in North America. A number of factors have been suggested to contribute to fentanyl's lethality, including rapid onset of action, in vivo potency, ligand bias, induction of muscle rigidity and reduced sensitivity to reversal by naloxone. Some of these factors can be considered to represent 'anomalous' pharmacological properties of fentanyl when compared with prototypical opioid agonists such as morphine. In this review, we examine the nature of fentanyl's 'anomalous' properties, to determine whether there is really a pharmacological basis to support the existence of such properties, and also discuss whether such properties are likely to contribute to overdose deaths involving fentanyls. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed issue on Advances in Opioid Pharmacology at the Time of the Opioid Epidemic. To view the other articles in this section visit http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.v180.7/issuetoc.
Illicit fentanyl and its analogues are very dangerous synthetic opioids, with high abuse potential and severe adverse effects including coma and death. They are used as adulterants in street heroin, cocaine, and methamphetamine, or as heroin substitutes sold to unaware users with a high risk of overdoses. Fentanyl and its analogues have also been identified in counterfeit medicinal products, such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, and alprazolam tablets, or as components of speedball mixtures together with cocaine or other stimulants. In recent years, a number of epidemics involving acute intoxications and deaths related to illicit fentanyl or its analogues have occurred in the United States, Europe, Canada, Australia, and Japan. In several cases, fatalities involved polysubstance use. A review of the most recent case reports or case series of acute intoxications and fatalities involving illicit fentanyl and its newest analogues is herein provided, together with the available information on intoxication symptoms, eventual death cause, and metabolites detected in different biological fluids and reported concentrations.
BACKGROUND: Since 2013, an unprecedented surge in fentanyl overdose deaths has been caused by heroin laced with illicitly produced fentanyl and/or fentanyl analogs (FAs) sold as heroin. The US Drug Enforcement Agency's National Forensic Laboratory Information System reported a >300% increase in fentanyl encounters from 4697 in 2014 to 14440 in 2015. In 2015, the CDC reported 9580 deaths caused by synthetic opioids, primarily fentanyl, a 72% increase from 2014. The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction has also encountered several new FAs in the heroin supply. Counterfeit pharmaceuticals containing mixtures of fentanyl and FAs continue to be a poorly recognized worldwide problem despite the WHO classifying several FAs as a serious threat to public health. CONTENT: This review covers the epidemiology of fentanyl abuse and discusses the clinical practice implications of widespread fentanyl abuse. It includes a historical perspective on the illicit FAs that have appeared in the US and European Union and reviews the methods available to identify FAs and emerging technologies useful for identifying previously undescribed analogs. A compilation of structural and mass spectral data on FAs reported thus far is provided. SUMMARY: Fentanyl and FAs have evolved into a global public health threat. It is important to understand the analytical, clinical, and regulatory efforts underway to assist communities affected by the current fentanyl epidemic.
Fentanyl withdrawal is common, but pharmacological management has largely mirrored traditional approaches to opioid withdrawal. Observations in a large urban center suggest alternative approaches, including the need for dose modification, should be considered.
Therapeutic Reviews aim to provide essential independent information for health professionals about drugs used in palliative and hospice care. Additional content is available on www.palliativedrugs.com. Country-specific books (Hospice and Palliative Care Formulary USA, and Palliative Care Formulary, British and Canadian editions) are also available and can be ordered from www.palliativedrugs.com. The series editors welcome feedback on the articles (hq@palliativedrugs.com).
Proton affinity is a major factor in the atmospheric pressure chemical ionization of illicit drugs. The detection of illicit drugs by mass spectrometry and ion mobility spectrometry relies on the analytes having greater proton affinities than background species. Evaluating proton affinities for fentanyl and its analogues is informative for predicting the likelihood of ionization in different environments and for optimizing the compounds' ionization and detection, such as through the addition of dopant chemicals. Herein, density functional theory was used to computationally determine the proton affinity and gas-phase basicity of 15 fentanyl compounds and several relevant molecules as a reference point. The range of proton affinities for the fentanyl compounds was from 1018 to 1078 kJ/mol. Fentanyl compounds with the higher proton affinity values appeared to form a bridge between the oxygen on the amide and the protonated nitrogen on the piperidine ring based on models and calculated bond distances. Experiments with fragmentation of proton-bound clusters using atmospheric flow tube-mass spectrometry (AFT-MS) provided estimates of relative proton affinities and showed proton affinity values of fentanyl compounds >1000 kJ/mol, which were consistent with the computational results. The high proton affinities of fentanyl compounds facilitate their detection by ambient ionization techniques in complex environments. The detection limits of the fentanyl compounds with AFT-MS are in the low femtogram range, which demonstrates the feasibility of trace vapor drug detection.
Fentanyl and fentanyl analogues (also called fentalogs) are used as medical prescriptions to treat pain for a long time. Apart from their pharmaceutical applications, they are misused immensely, causing the opioid crisis. Fentanyl and its analogues are produced in clandestine laboratories and sold over dark Web markets to different parts of the world, leading to a rise in the death rate due to drug overdose. This is because the users are unaware of the lethal effects of the newer forms of fentalogs. Unlike other drugs, these fentalogs cannot be detected easily, as very little data are available, and this is one of the major reasons for the risk of life-threatening poisoning or deaths. Hence, rigorous studies of these drugs and their possible metabolites are required. It is also necessary to develop techniques for the detection of minute traces of metabolites in biological fluids. This Review provides an overview of the application of hyphenated chromatographic techniques used to analyze multiple novel fentalogs, using in vivo and in vitro methods. The article focuses on the metabolites formed in phase I and phase II processes in biological specimens obtained in recent cases of drug abuse and overdose deaths that could be useful for the detection and differentiation of multiple fentalogs.
RATIONALE: Fentanyl and fentanyl analogs continue to pose a serious threat to the public health. The vast number of fentanyl analogs emerging on the black-market call for optimized analytical methods for the detection, analysis, and characterization of these extremely dangerous drugs. METHODS: Atmospheric pressure solids analysis probe (ASAP) mass spectrometry was used for the rapid analysis of 250 synthetic opioid standards, including 211 fentanyl analogs, 32 non-fentanyl related opioids, and 8 fentanyl precursors. Four cone voltages (5, 15, 35 and 50 V) were used to obtain fingerprint data for each opioid reference sample. RESULTS: The generated and processed mass spectra of the 250 synthetic opioids analyzed was utilized to create an ASAP(+) database that contains the largest compendium of mass spectra for fentanyl analogs. The built library was integrated into LiveID software, enabling real-time analyte identification. The efficacy of the software's ability to identify fentanyl analogs in a sample utilizing the spectral library was tested by analyzing five blind and four reaction mixtures. The correct identity of these nine samples was all within the top three ranked matches. CONCLUSION: We demonstrate how the RADIAN ASAP, alongside a real-time sample recognition software, can be utilized as a presumptive tool for the screening of fentanyl analogs within samples in question, making it a promising alternative to some of the most commonly used analytical screening techniques.
Abuse of the highly toxic compound fentanyl and its analogues is increasing, raising serious public health concerns due to their potency and availability. Therefore, there is a need for decontamination methodologies to safely remove fentanyl to avoid harmful exposure. In this study, the efficacy of commercial and in-house synthesized decontamination agents (Dahlgren Decon, RSDL (Reactive Skin Decontamination Lotion), FAST-ACT (First applied sorbent treatment against chemical threats), GDS2000, alldecont MED, bleach, Domestos Spray Bleach, Effekt Klor, MgO, TiO(2)-nanodiamond, and CeO(2)) were evaluated for the degradation of fentanyl and carfentanil under controlled laboratory conditions and on wooden floor surfaces. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis showed that oxidative decontamination agents were the most effective, with N-oxides identified as major degradation products. The physiological effects of these N-oxides were also investigated regarding their ability to activate the micro-opioid receptor and their metabolism in human liver microsomes. The results provide empirical evidence that complements prior research findings on the degradation of fentanyl and carfentanil using a variety of decontamination agents.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: The analgesic effect on labour pain of either spinal or epidural sufentanil or fentanyl was tested in a total of 80 primiparous parturients at an early phase of the delivery. The aim of the study was to compare the level of analgesia achieved within 20 minutes. METHODS: The parturients were randomly assigned to groups receiving either spinal sufentanil (5 microg), epidural sufentanil (20 microg), spinal fentanyl (20 microg) or epidural fentanyl (100 microg), whereafter the parturients were monitored for reported pain during contraction and side effects for 30 minutes. The primary outcome was the level of analgesia achieved within 20 minutes, while the secondary outcome was the time until the administration of the first epidural bolus. RESULTS: At baseline, the mean maximum pain VAS was 86 (84-89) mm. At 20 minutes after spinal sufentanil, epidural sufentanil, spinal fentanyl or epidural fentanyl, the maximum VAS was 19 (7-31), 45 (32-59), 25 (10-39) or 52 (40-63) mm, respectively (P < .01 spin vs epid groups). There were no differences in efficacy between spinal or epidural sufentanil and fentanyl. The mean (95% CI) time to the activation of epidural analgesia was 151 (111-192), 130 (93-168), 177 (121-234) and 112 (80-143) minutes after spinal sufentanil, epidural sufentanil, spinal fentanyl and epidural fentanyl, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: In terms of a reduction of VAS score at 20 minutes, epidural sufentanil or fentanyl provide 63% and 60% of the analgesic effect of the corresponding spinal analgesia. Epidural sufentanil or fentanyl could be used in situations in which spinal/CSE administration is not possible or desired.
The development of safe therapeutics to manage pain is of central interest for biomedical applications. The fluorinated fentanyl derivative N-(3-fluoro-1-phenethylpiperidin-4-yl)-N-phenylpropionamide (NFEPP) is potentially a safer alternative to fentanyl because unlike fentanyl horizontal line which binds to the mu-opioid receptor (MOR) at both physiological and acidic pH horizontal line NFEPP might bind to the MOR only at acidic pH typical of inflamed tissue. Knowledge of the protonation-coupled dynamics of the receptor-drug interactions is thus required to understand the molecular mechanism by which receptor activation initiates cell signaling to silence pain. To this end, here we have carried out extensive atomistic simulations of the MOR in different protonation states, in the absence of opioid drugs, and in the presence of fentanyl vs NFEPP. We used graph-based analyses to characterize internal hydrogen-bond networks that could contribute to the activation of the MOR. We find that fentanyl and NFEPP prefer distinct binding poses and that, in their binding poses, fentanyl and NFEPP partake in distinct internal hydrogen-bond networks, leading to the cytoplasmic G-protein-binding region. Moreover, the protonation state of functionally important aspartic and histidine side chains impacts hydrogen-bond networks that extend throughout the receptor, such that the ligand-bound MOR presents at its cytoplasmic G-protein-binding side, a hydrogen-bonding environment where dynamics depend on whether fentanyl or NFEPP is bound, and on the protonation state of specific MOR groups. The exquisite sensitivity of the internal protein-water hydrogen-bond network to the protonation state and to details of the drug binding could enable the MOR to elicit distinct pH- and opioid-dependent responses at its cytoplasmic G-protein-binding site.
Unintentional drug overdose deaths have climbed to record high levels, claiming approximately 70,000 lives in the United States in 2017 alone (1). The emergence of illicitly manufactured fentanyl* (a synthetic, short-acting opioid with 50-100 times the potency of morphine) mixed into heroin, cocaine, and counterfeit pills, with or without the users' knowledge, has increased the risk for fatal overdose (2,3). The New York City (NYC) Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) conducts routine overdose mortality surveillance by linking death certificates with toxicology findings from the NYC Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME). A 55% increase in the rate of fatal drug overdose in NYC was observed from 2015 to 2017, resulting in the highest number of overdose deaths recorded since systematic reporting began in 2000. Toxicology data indicate that this unprecedented increase in overdose deaths is attributable to fentanyl. Early identification of increased fentanyl involvement enabled DOHMH to respond rapidly to the opioid overdose epidemic by increasing awareness of the risks associated with fentanyl and developing effective risk reduction messaging. These results strongly suggest that, wherever possible, jurisdictions should consider integrating toxicology findings into routine overdose surveillance and work with local medical examiners or coroners to include fentanyl in the literal text on death certificates.
Fentanyl is a potent synthetic opioid used as a narcotic analgesic supplement in general and regional anesthesia as well as in management of persistent, severe chronic pain. Alarming epidemiological and forensic medicine reports, accumulated mainly during the last two decades, point to a growing increase in illicit use of fentanyl, mainly in North America and Europe. Toxicological data indicates that fentanyl use is inextricably linked with polydrug use. There are two main sources of fentanyl on the "recreational" drug market. First, the most common, combines illicitly manufactured fentanyl from clandestine sources. The drug is often mixed up with heroin ("fake heroin") to increase its potency at a little cost, or included in cocaine products. It can also be mixed into and sold as oxycodone-, hydrocodone- or alprazolam-containing tablets. The other way to gain fentanyl is through the diversion of fentanyl-containing medicines, especially transdermal patches (FTPs). Fentanyl extracted from FTP can be administered intravenously, insufflated or inhaled after volatilization. The drug can also be delivered by oral or transmucosal application of the whole patch, or by rectal insertion. The most common overdose symptoms are coma, lethargy, respiratory depression and arrest. Although naloxone, an opioid receptor antagonist, is the standard drug for fentanyl overdose rescue, attempts to revive patients with naloxone could be unsuccessful, due to the rapid onset of fentanyl's action. As the fentanyl problem is constantly growing, there is an urgent need for new, effective harm-reduction strategies and technologies, as well as overdose maintenance.
There is a need for non-contact, real-time vapor detection of drugs to combat illicit transportation and help curb the opioid epidemic. The low volatility of drugs, like fentanyl, makes room temperature vapor detection of illicit drugs challenging, but feasible by atmospheric flow tube-mass spectrometry (AFT-MS). AFT-MS is a non-contact vapor detection approach capable of ultra-trace detection of drugs, including fentanyl and its analogs at low parts-per-quadrillion (ppq(v)) levels. The determination of vapor pressure values of fentanyl is necessary to understand potential vapor concentrations that may be available for detection. In this paper, vapor pressures of fentanyl free base and fentanyl hydrochloride salt (a common form of the illicit drug) were measured as a function of temperature at or near ambient conditions using the transpiration (gas saturation) method and AFT-MS. Based on our measurements, the vapor pressure of fentanyl at 25  degrees C is 9.0 x 10(-14) atm (90 ppq(v)), and the vapor pressure of fentanyl hydrochloride at 25  degrees C is 1.8 x 10(-17) atm (0.018 ppq(v)). We also demonstrate non-contact, real-time vapor detection of fentanyl. Preconcentration of vapors can further extend the detection capabilities. The collection, desorption, and detection of fentanyl vapors at ambient conditions was demonstrated for sampling times of seconds to an hour resulting in increased signal. AFT-MS is a viable detection method of fentanyl and other drugs for screening of packages and cargo.
INTRODUCTION: Nonpharmaceutical fentanyl has reconfigured the U.S. illicit drug market, contributing to a drastic increase in overdose drug deaths. While illicit fentanyl has subsumed the drug supply in the Northeast and Midwest, it has more recently reached the West. For this study, we explored knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors among people who use drugs in Oregon in the context of the emergence of fentanyl in the drug supply. METHODS: We conducted in-depth interviews by phone with 34 people who use drugs in Oregon from May to June 2021. We used thematic analysis to analyze transcripts and construct themes. RESULTS: People who use drugs knew about fentanyl, expressed doubt that fentanyl could be found in methamphetamine; believed those who were younger or less experienced were at higher risk for harm; and received information about fentanyl from drug dealers, syringe service programs, or peers (other people who use drugs). Preference for fentanyl's presence in drugs like heroin or methamphetamine was mixed. Some felt that their preference was irrelevant since fentanyl was unavoidable. Participants reported engaging in harm reduction practices, including communicating about fentanyl with dealers and peers, testing for fentanyl, using smaller quantities of drugs, switching from injecting to smoking, and using naloxone. CONCLUSION: People who use drugs are responding to the rise of fentanyl on the West Coast and are concerned about the increasing uncertainty and hazards of the drug supply. They are willing and motivated to adopt harm reduction behaviors. Harm reduction promotion from syringe service programs and public health agencies is essential to reduce injury and death from nonpharmaceutical fentanyl.
