Cardiotoxicity manifested as myocardial ischemia is not generally recognized as a side effect of 5-fluorouracil. However, there have been at least 35 cases reported since 1975. In only one of these cases was a somewhat detailed evaluation done to rule out underlying coronary disease. The case reported here of 5-FU cardiotoxicity included an extensive cardiac evaluation to rule out underlying coronary disease and to assess spasm. The literature on 5-FU cardiotoxicity is also reviewed, and its possible mechanisms are analyzed.
Considering that cancer continues to be an important cause of death worldwide, several conventional anticancer treatments are widely used. However, most of them display low selectivity against malignant cells and induce many adverse side effects. Among these, the use of therapies based on 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) has been one of the most efficient, with a broad-spectrum. Due to these circumstances, various modifications of 5-FU have been developed to improve drug delivery and reduce side effects. Among the optimization strategies, modifications of 5-FU at N1 or N3 position are made, usually including the incorporation of pharmacologically active compounds with anticancer activity (called hybrid molecule) and functionalization with other groups of compounds (called conjugates). Several studies have been conducted in the search for new alternative therapies against cancer. Many of them have evidenced that hybrid compounds exhibit good anticancer activity, which has emerged as a promising strategy in this field of drug discovery and development. Furthermore, the binding of 5-FU to amino acids, peptides, phospholipids, polymers, among others, improves metabolic stability and absorption. This review highlights the potential of hybrids and derivatives based on 5-FU as a scaffold for the development of antitumor agents. Besides, it also presents a detailed description of the different strategies employed to design and synthesized these compounds, together with their biological activities and structure-activity relationship (SAR) analysis.
5-Fluorouracil, first introduced as a rationally synthesized anticancer agent 30 years ago, continues to be widely used in the management of several common malignancies including cancer of the colon, breast and skin. This drug, an analogue of the naturally occurring pyrimidine uracil, is metabolised via the same metabolic pathways as uracil. Although several potential sites of antitumour activity have been identified, the precise mechanism of action and the extent to which each of these sites contributes to tumour or host cell toxicity remains unclear. Several assay methods are available to quantify 5-fluorouracil in serum, plasma and other biological fluids. Unfortunately, there is no evidence that plasma drug concentrations can predict antitumour effect or host cell toxicity. The recent development of clinically useful pharmacodynamic assays provides an attractive alternative to plasma drug concentrations, since these assays allow the detection of active metabolites of 5-fluorouracil in biopsied tumour or normal tissue. 5-Fluorouracil is poorly absorbed after oral administration, with erratic bioavailability. The parenteral preparation is the major dosage form, used intravenously (bolus or continuous infusion). Recently, studies have demonstrated the pharmacokinetic rationale and clinical feasibility of hepatic arterial infusion and intraperitoneal administration of 5-fluorouracil. In addition, 5-fluorouracil continues to be used in topical preparations for the treatment of malignant skin cancers. Following parenteral administration of 5-fluorouracil, there is rapid distribution of the drug and rapid elimination with an apparent terminal half-life of approximately 8 to 20 minutes. The rapid elimination is primarily due to swift catabolism of the liver. As with all drugs, caution should be used in administering 5-fluorouracil in various pathophysiological states. In general, however, there are no set recommendations for dose adjustment in the presence of renal or hepatic dysfunction. Drug interactions continue to be described with other antineoplastic drugs, as well as with other classes of agents.
Two cases of 5-fluorouracil-induced neurotoxicity from the University of North Carolina are presented. 5-Fluorouracil metabolism is briefly discussed with reference to possible mechanisms for the neurotoxicity. A possible role for thiamine supplementation in the prevention of this unusual complication is supported by our experience.
Our of 140 patients treated with intravenous 5-fluorouracil, four developed ischaemic chest pain within 18 hours of either the second or third dose. In three of these patients the pain recurred after subsequent doses. Predose electrocardiograms in two cases were normal. None of the four patients had a history of ischaemic heart disease, although all had received left ventricular irradiation. Although cardiotoxicity is a rare complication of fluorouracil treatment, it merits wider recognition.
A mutant (furA3) was isolated from the S1 wild-type strain of Nectria haematococca on the basis of its resistance to 5-fluorouracil (5FU). This mutant has greatly reduced activity of uracil phosphoribosyltransferase, a pyrimidine salvage enzyme catalyzing the synthesis of UMP from uracil. The metabolism of 5FU was examined in both strains by using 19F nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. In the S1 strain, 5FU appears to be metabolized by two pathways operating simultaneously: (i) conversion to fluoronucleotides and (ii) degradation into alpha-fluoro-beta-alanine. The furA3 mutant shows metabolic changes consistent with a uracil phosphoribosyltransferase lesion, since it takes up 5FU and forms a small amount of alpha-fluoro-beta-alanine but does not synthesize fluoronucleotides. Since pigment synthesis is strongly enhanced by 5FU in the S1 wild-type strain but not in the furA3 mutant, these results support the hypothesis that 5FU stimulation of secondary metabolism in N. haematococca is not mediated by the drug itself but involves a phosphorylated anabolite.
Two novel dual functional agents, 3[3-(2,4-dinitro-phenylamino)-propyl]-5-fluoro-1H-pyrimidine-2,4-dione 7 and N-[3-(2,4-dinitro-phenylamino)-propoxy]urea 8, resulting from linkage of 2,4-dinitrophenylamine through three carbon atoms with 5-fluorouracil 5 and hydroxyurea 6, respectively, were prepared and their in vitro aerobic cytotoxicities in HT-29 cell line with and without radiation were determined. Compounds 7 and 8 unlike their components were not cytotoxic but showed radiosensitizing activity.
Natural bentonite clay (BE) underwent modification steps that involved the exfoliation of its layers into separated nanosheets (EXBE) and further functionalization of these sheets with methanol, forming methoxy-exfoliated bentonite (Mth/EXBE). The synthetically modified products were investigated as enhanced carriers of 5-fluorouracil as compared to raw bentonite. The modification process strongly induced loading properties that increased to 214.4 mg/g (EXBE) and 282.6 mg/g (Mth/EXBE) instead of 124.9 mg/g for bentonite. The loading behaviors were illustrated based on the kinetic (pseudo-first-order model), classic isotherm (Langmuir model), and advanced isotherm modeling (monolayer model of one energy). The Mth/EBE carrier displays significantly higher loading site density (95.9 mg/g) as compared to EXBE (66.2 mg/g) and BE (44.9 mg/g). The loading numbers of 5-Fu in each site of BE, EXBE, and Mth/EXBE (>1) reflect the vertical orientation of these loaded ions involving multi-molecular processes. The loading processes that occurred appeared to be controlled by complex physical and weak chemical mechanisms, considering both Gaussian energy (<8 KJ/mol) as well as loading energy (<40 KJ/mol). The releasing patterns of EXBE and Mth/EXBE exhibit prolonged and continuous properties up to 100 h, with Mth/EXBE displaying much faster behaviors. Based on the release kinetic modeling, the release reactions exhibit non-Fickian transport release properties, validating cooperative diffusion and erosion release mechanisms. The cytotoxicity of 5-Fu is also significantly enhanced by these carriers: 5-Fu/BE (8.6% cell viability), 5-Fu/EXBE (2.21% cell viability), and 5-Fu/Mth/EXBE (0.73% cell viability).
PURPOSE: To systematically review the incidence, manifestations and predisposing factors for cardiovascular toxicity in cancer patients treated with systemic 5-fluorouracil or capecitabine. DESIGN: We searched PubMed, EMBASE and Web of science for studies with >/= 20 cancer patients evaluating cardiovascular toxicity of 5-fluorouracil and capecitabine. We hand searched the reference lists of all included studies. Study selection and assessment of risk of bias were performed by two authors independently. RESULTS: We identified 30 eligible studies (1 meta-analyses of 4 RCTs, 18 prospective and 11 retrospective). Symptomatic cardiotoxicity occurred in 0-20% of the patients treated with 5-fluorouracil and in 3-35% with capecitabine. The most common symptom was chest pain (0-18.6%) followed by palpitations (0-23.1%), dyspnoea (0-7.6%) and hypotension (0-6%). Severe clinical events such as myocardial infarction, cardiogenic shock and cardiac arrest occurred in 0-2%. Mortality rates ranged from 0 to 8%. Asymptomatic cardiac influence was demonstrated on ECG, in NT-proBNP measurements and with ultrasonic cyclic variation of integrated backscatter. Predisposing factors were mostly tested in univariate analyses. Preexisting cardiac disease was a risk factor in some studies, but there were divergent results. There was some evidence for increased cardiotoxicity during continuous infusion schedules and with concomitant cisplatin treatment. The effects of previous or current chest-radiotherapy were ambiguous. CONCLUSION: Larger studies suggest an incidence of symptomatic cardiotoxicity of 1.2-4.3% during fluorouracil treatment, however subclinical cardiac influence are common. Possible risk factors are cardiac co-morbidity, continuous infusion schedules and concomitant cisplatin treatment, but existing evidence are of insufficient quality.
AIMS: 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is widely used in combination chemotherapy, and literature suggests pharmacokinetic-guided dosing to improve clinical efficacy and reduce toxicity. This study aimed to determine the pharmacokinetic exposure of both 5-FU and its metabolite, 5,6-dihydrofluorouracil (DHFU), in patients with gastrointestinal malignancy and to establish a simplified strategy to assist in therapeutic drug management for dose optimization. METHODS: This was a prospective, observational study, performed in 27 patients diagnosed with gastrointestinal malignancy who were prescribed 5-FU. Multiple samples were collected per patient over the slow bolus (15-20 min) and continuous infusion period (over 44 h) in doses 1 and 3, and the concentrations of 5-FU and DHFU were measured. RESULTS: A higher proportion of patients had exposures within the therapeutic range in dose 3 (50%) as compared to dose 1 (37.5%) with 5-FU. There was an association between delayed time to maximum concentration of DHFU and a high maximum concentration of 5-FU. A limited sampling strategy was developed with 4 samples, 2 during the bolus period and 2 during the continuous period (at 18 h and the end of infusion), which accurately predicted the total area under the curve of 5-FU. CONCLUSION: Using body surface area-based dosing with 5-FU, 50-60% of patients were outside of the therapeutic range. In the absence of genotype testing, measurement of the metabolite DHFU could be a phenotypical measure of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase enzyme activity. A limited sampling strategy was developed in patients who were prescribed a combination regimen of slow bolus, followed by a 44-hour continuous infusion of 5-FU to assist in the therapeutic drug management of patients.
PURPOSE: Chemoradiotherapy, the combination of external radiation therapy and concurrent chemotherapy, has been the basis for the oncologic management of many patients since its development in the 1960s. Fluorouracil (FU) chemoradiotherapy has demonstrated success in several organ sites with multiple dosing schedules that now guide the selection of oral analogs of FU to provide new chemoradiotherapy options. METHODS: This article reviews the metabolism and pharmacology of FU and the advantages of administration of FU by continuous infusion or bolus. The potential role and impact of the oral fluorouracil prodrugs UFT, S-1, BOF-A2, and capecitabine as replacements for intravenous administration are discussed. The results of recent chemoradiotherapy studies with FU from 2000 to 2003 are summarized in rectal, head and neck, esophageal, gastric, pancreatic, biliary, anal, and cervical cancers. RESULTS: Chemoradiotherapy with FU has the potential to widen the therapeutic window by minimizing normal tissue toxicity while maintaining effective tumor toxicity. Overall, FU chemoradiotherapy maximizes local control and, for some tumor sites (such as head and neck, pancreatic, biliary, cervical, esophageal, and gastric cancers), improves survival rates. Moreover, FU chemoradiotherapy results in improved organ preservation with excellent functional outcome in several anatomic sites including head and neck cancer, anal, and rectal cancer, with improved sphincter preservation. CONCLUSION: FU chemoradiotherapy continues to play an important role in the management of many cancer sites. During the last four decades, optimal dosing schedules have produced a therapeutic gain. The introduction of oral prodrug analogs will likely further improve the results of FU therapy in several organ systems, such as the rectum, head and neck, and esophagus.
