39 chronic schizophrenic out-patients were given either fluphenazine decanoate or enanthate for a 1-year double-blind trial. Doses of 25 mg were given for the first 6 months and 37.5 mg for the last 6 months. For both agents the intervals between treatments lengthened significantly over the course of the trial. Fluphenazine decanoate showed a non-significant trend for a longer duration of action coupled with a significantly lower incidence of extrapyramidal side effects.
A sensitive radioimmunoassay was developed to determine the steady-state, fixed-dose pharmacokinetic profile of fluphenazine decanoate in nine outpatients. To see if neuroleptic blood levels measured by this assay correlated with a clinical event, we performed a cross-sectional study of fluphenazine blood levels in 11 patients with and 17 patients without tardive dyskinesia. The results do not support the hypothesis that fluphenazine decanoate serum levels correlate with TD occurrence.
Fifty-seven patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia were started on either fluphenazine decanoate or flupenthixol decanoate injections in a double-blind trial just prior to discharge into the community. During the six month follow-up 30 per cent dropped out of the treatment. Of those observed for six months, 7 per cent relapsed, 54 per cent experienced depressive symptoms and 88 per cent extrapyramidial side-effects. Analysis of both clinical data and the ratings failed to discriminate between the two drugs.
A trial involving patients receiving fluphenazine decanoate was designed to compare the effects of orphenadrine hydrochloride (Disipal) and its major metabolite, tofenacin hydrochloride (Elamol) on the Parkinsonian side-effects and depression occurring during fluphenazine decanoate therapy. The trial was a double-blind one, with crossover. It was found that both drugs exerted an adequate control on the Parkinsonian side-effects, but there was no significant difference between their effects. Ophenadrine, however, was shown to be significantly superior (p less than 0-05) in the control of the depressive side-effects.
Multidrug resistance (MDR) transporters such as ATP-Binding Cassette (ABC) and Major Facilitator Superfamily proteins are important mediators of antifungal drug resistance, particularly with respect to azole class drugs. Consequently, identifying molecules that are not susceptible to this mechanism of resistance is an important goal for new antifungal drug discovery. As part of a project to optimize the antifungal activity of clinically used phenothiazines, we synthesized a fluphenazine derivative (CWHM-974) with 8-fold higher activity against Candida spp. compared to the fluphenazine and with activity against Candida spp. with reduced fluconazole susceptibility due to increased MDR transporters. Here, we show that the improved C. albicans activity is because fluphenazine induces its own resistance by triggering expression of Candida drug resistance (CDR) transporters while CWHM-974 induces expression but does not appear to be a substrate for the transporters or is insensitive to their effects through other mechanisms. We also found that fluphenazine and CWHM-974 are antagonistic with fluconazole in C. albicans but not in C. glabrata, despite inducing CDR1 expression to high levels. Overall, CWHM-974 is one of the few examples of a molecule in which relatively small structural modifications significantly reduced susceptibility to multidrug transporter-mediated resistance.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the causative pathogen of pandemic coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). So far, no approved therapy has been developed to halt the spread of the pathogen, and unfortunately, the strategies for developing a new therapy will require a long time and very extensive resources. Therefore, drug repurposing has emerged as an ideal strategy toward a smart, versatile, quick way to confine the lethal disease. In this endeavor, natural products have been an untapped source for new drugs. This review represents the confederated experience of multidisciplinary researchers of 99 articles using several databases: Google Scholar, Science Direct, MEDLINE, Web of Science, Scopus, and PubMed. To establish the hypothesis, a Bayesian perspective of a systematic review was used to outline evidence synthesis. Our docking documentation of 69 compounds and future research agenda assumptions were directed toward finding an effective and economic anti-COVID-19 treatment from natural products. Glucosinolate, flavones, and sulfated nitrogenous compounds demonstrate direct anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity through inhibition protease enzymes and may be considered potential candidates against coronavirus. These findings could be a starting point to initiate an integrative study that may encompass interested scientists and research institutes to test the hypothesis in vitro, in vivo, and in clinics after satisfying all ethical requirements.
Fluphenazine and perphenazine as a phenothiazine-class antipsychotic drugs are widely used to treat psychoses and schizophrenia, however their use is associated with significant side effects such as extrapyramidal symptoms as well as ocular and skin disorders. The aim of this study was to examine the effect of fluphenazine and perphenazine on cell viability, melanogenesis and antioxidant defense system in normal human melanocytes. It has been shown that both phenothiazines induce concentration-dependent loss in cell viability. The value of EC(5)(0). was calculated to be 1.24 and 2.76 muM for fluphenazine and perphenazine, respectively. Fluphenazine in concentration of 1.0 muM and perphenazine in concentrations of 1.0 and 3.0 muM inhibied melanogenesis and decreased microphthalmia-associated transcription factor content. To study the effect of both analyzed drugs on antioxidant defense system in melanocytes, the level of hydrogen peroxide and the activities of antioxidant enzymes: superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase were determined. Fluphenazine and perphenazine in higher analyzed concentrations caused depletion of melanocytes antioxidant status, what indicated the induction of oxidative stress. The observed changes in melanization process and antioxidant defense system in pigmented cells exposed to fluphenazine and perphenazine in vibo suggest a significant role of melanin and melanocytes in the mechanisms of undesirable side effects of these drugs in vivo, especially directed to pigmented tissues. Moreover, the presented differences in modulation of biochemical processes in melanocytes may be an explanation for various toxic activity of the analyzed phenothiazine derivatives in vivo.
Brain metastasis is the main cause of treatment failure and melanoma-related death. Inadequate concentrations of therapeutic drugs in the brain due to the blood-brain barrier (BBB) pose a major challenge in the treatment of brain metastasis. Antipsychotics can cross the BBB to reach the brain. Fluphenazine (FPZ) inhibits the survival of melanoma cells in vitro. However, its efficacy in suppressing the metastasis of melanoma, especially brain metastasis, remains unknown. Therefore, we explored whether fluphenazine (FPZ) can be repurposed for treating melanoma metastasis. A subcutaneous tumor model, and experimental metastasis models that simulate the outgrowth of melanoma cells in the brain, lung, and bone were established to verify the inhibitory effect of FPZ on melanoma cells. FPZ showed potential inhibitory effects against melanoma both in vivo and in vitro. It induced G0/G1 phase arrest and-mitochondrion-mediated intrinsic apoptosis, and inhibited autophagic flux in melanoma cells in vitro. In vivo, subcutaneous tumor, brain, lung, and bone models of metastatic melanoma were established. Intraperitoneal injection of FPZ (8 mg/kg) significantly inhibited melanoma growth in the subcutaneous and experimental metastasis models. In a lung metastasis model, FPZ reduced the proportion of M2 macrophages and increased the proportion of CD8(+) T cells and NK cells in vivo, thereby promoting an anticancer immune response. The findings of this study indicate that FPZ is a potential drug candidate for treating metastatic melanoma.
Plasma prolactin and fluphenazine concentrations were measured in a group of 17 patients (9 males, 8 females) with schizophrenia who were receiving chronic treatment with fluphenazine decanoate. Neither measure was significantly correlated with clinical effect, as measured by the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, at any of the 5 pre-injection times examined. None of the measures showed statistically significant (P greater than 0.05; MANOVA) variations with time. Neither measure showed a significant correlation with the dose (expressed as mg/kg) of fluphenazine. The implications of the study for monitoring chronic treatment of schizophrenia are discussed.
A successful method of treating intractable neoplastic pain in 12 cases is discussed. A completely new method was tried combining long-acting phenothiazine and lidocaine to achieve long-lasting pain relief. This combination gave pain relief which lasted for weeks. A possible explanation of the mechanism is offered.
Cancer is regard as one of the key factors of mortality and morbidity in the world. Treatment is mainly based on chemotherapeutic drugs that, when used in targeted therapies, have serious side effects. 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is a drug commonly used against colorectal cancer (CRC), despite its side effects. Combination of this compound with natural products is a promising source in cancer treatment research. In recent years, propolis has become the subject of intense pharmacological and chemical studies linked to its diverse biological properties. With a complex composition rich in phenolic compounds, propolis is described as showing positive or synergistic interactions with several chemotherapeutic drugs. The present work evaluated the in vitro cytotoxic activity of the most representative propolis types, such as green, red and brown propolis, in combination with chemotherapeutic or CNS drugs on HT-29 colon cancer cell lines. The phenolic composition of the propolis samples was evaluated by LC-DAD-ESI/MS(n) analysis. According to the type of propolis, the composition varied; green propolis was rich in terpenic phenolic acids and red propolis in polyprenylated benzophenones and isoflavonoids, while brown propolis was composed mainly of flavonoids and phenylpropanoids. Generally, for all propolis types, the results demonstrated that combing propolis with 5-FU and fluphenazine successfully enhances the in vitro cytotoxic activity. For green propolis, the combination demonstrated an enhancement of the in vitro cytotoxic effect compared to green propolis alone, at all concentrations, while for brown propolis, the combination in the concentration of 100 mug/mL gave a lower number of viable cells, even when compared with 5-FU or fluphenazine alone. The same was observed for the red propolis combination, but with a higher reduction in cell viability. The combination index, calculated based on the Chou-Talalay method, suggested that the combination of 5-FU and propolis extracts had a synergic growth inhibitory effect in HT-29 cells, while with fluphenazine, only green and red propolis, at a concentration of 100 mug/mL, presented synergism.
Fluphenazine HCl (FLU) is an anxiolytic, while Nortriptyline HCl (NOR) is an anti-depressant. They are co-formulated together to treat depression and schizophrenia. Perphenazine (PER) and dibenzosuberone (DBZ) are the pharmacopeial impurities of FLU and NOR, respectively. Four spectrophotometric and multivariate chemometric methods were developed to determine the two drugs together or in presence of their two impurities in their bulk and pharmaceutical formulation. Method (A) is the triple divisor-ratio derivative (TDR) method, where the zero order spectrum of each component was divided by a mixture of the other 3 components, then the peak amplitudes of the first derivative spectra of FLU, NOR and DBZ were measured at 265, 245.4 and 283.2 nm, respectively. Method (B) is the double divisor-ratio difference-dual wavelength (DD-RD-DW) method, in which each component spectrum mixture was divided by a binary mixture of 2 of the interfering components. In the resulting ratio spectra, the amplitude difference is calculated between 2 wavelengths at which the third interfering component has zero difference. Methods (C and D) are the principle component analysis (PCA) and partial least squares (PLS) models. Methods (A and B) failed to quantify PER (FLU impurity), while (C and D) succeeded to quantify all components. The four methods have been applied for the prediction of the FLU and NOR in their pharmaceutical formulation with good accuracy and precision. The proposed methods have been validated according to the ICH guidelines and the results were within the acceptable limits.
The levels of fluphenazine and fluphenazine sulphoxide in schizophrenic patients who were randomly assigned to receive either 5 mg or 25 mg of fluphenazine decanoate every two weeks were monitored. Patients treated with 25 mg of fluphenazine decanoate required three months to reach a steady-state plasma level, indicating that those patients who are being converted from oral to depot fluphenazine should continue to receive oral supplementation during the first three months of treatment with fluphenazine decanoate. Plasma levels of fluphenazine sulphoxide were lower than levels of fluphenazine. At six and nine months following randomisation, there was a statistically significant relationship between lower fluphenazine plasma levels and an increased risk of psychotic exacerbations. A relatively weak relationship was found between fluphenazine plasma levels and akinesia, but non-significant relationships between fluphenazine levels and other neurological side-effects including akathisia, retardation, and tardive dyskinesia. Monitoring the plasma levels may be helpful to clinicians who are attempting to treat stabilised patients with the lowest effective dose of fluphenazine decanoate.
Protein misfolding and aggregation, leading to amyloid fibril formation, are characteristic of many devastating and debilitating amyloid diseases. Accordingly, there is significant interest in the mechanisms underlying amyloid fibril formation and identification of possible intervention tools. Small molecule drug compounds approved for human use or for use in phase I-III clinical trials were investigated for their effects on amyloid formation by human apolipoprotein (apo) C-II. Several of these compounds modulated the rate of amyloid formation by apoC-II. Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), a green tea catechin, was an effective inhibitor of apoC-II fibril formation, and the antipsychotic drug, fluphenazine.HCl, was a potent activator. Both EGCG and fluphenazine.HCl exerted concentration-dependent effects on the rate of fibril formation, bound to apoC-II fibrils with high affinity, and competitively reduced thioflavin T binding. EGCG significantly altered the size distribution of fibrils, most likely by promoting the lateral association of fibrils and subsequent formation of large aggregates. Fluphenazine.HCl did not significantly alter the size distribution of fibrils, but it may induce the formation of a small population of rod-like fibrils that differ from the characteristic ribbon-like fibrils normally observed for apoC-II. The findings of this study emphasize the effects of small molecule drugs on the kinetics of amyloid fibril formation and their roles in determining fibril structure and aggregate size.
A liquid chromatographic procedure has been developed for the assay, content uniformity, and identification of single active ingredient formulations of desipramine, fluphenazine, and promazine. The drugs are extracted from formulations with methanol or dilute hydrochloric acid and quantitated against an internal standard (norephedrine). The drugs are identified by comparison of retention times with those of the reference standards.
Twenty-one patients with schizophrenia who met criteria for neuroleptic treatment resistance or intolerance participated in a crossover, placebo-controlled, double-blind comparison of long-term typical neuroleptic and clozapine treatment. Clozapine significantly reduced total as well as positive and negative symptoms in comparison with both fluphenazine and placebo. Of the 21 patients, eight (38%) showed clozapine superiority on the basis of prospective response criteria. High levels of extrapyramidal side effects during fluphenazine treatment and later onset of illness were clinical predictors of clozapine superiority. Clozapine and fluphenazine equally reduced plasma homovanillic acid levels in comparison with placebo, although fluphenazine but not clozapine increased plasma prolactin level. A striking biologic difference between clozapine and fluphenazine was clozapine's enhancement of indexes of noradrenergic activity. Superior clozapine response was predicted by low ratios of cerebrospinal fluid homovanillic acid to 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, consistent with the notion that balance between dopaminergic and serotoninergic systems is important for clozapine's mechanism of action.
Haloperidol, fluphenazine, perphenazine, and thiothixene are "typical" antipsychotic drugs that are used in the treatment of schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders. The monitoring of the use of these drugs has applications in therapeutic drug monitoring and overdose situations. LC-MS/MS is used to analyze plasma/serum extracts with deuterated analog of imipramine as the internal standard to ensure accurate quantitation and control for any potential matrix effects. Positive ion electrospray is used to introduce the analytes into the mass spectrometer. Selected reaction monitoring of two product ions for each analyte allows for the calculation of ion ratios which ensures correct identification of each analyte, while a matrix-matched calibration curve is used for quantitation.
