In this study, we examined the metabolic adaptations of a chemoresistant prostate cancer cell line in comparison to a sensitive cell line. We utilized prostate cancer LNCaP cells and subjected them to a stepwise increase in the antiandrogen 2-hydroxy-flutamide (FLU) concentration to generate a FLU-resistant cell line (LN-FLU). These LN-FLU cells displayed characteristics of cancer stem cells, exhibited drug resistance, and showed a significantly reduced expression of Cyclin D1, along with the overexpression of p16, pointing to a proliferation arrest. In comparing the cancer stem-like LN-FLU cells to the LNCaP cells, we observed a decrease in the expression of CTP-choline cytidylyl transferase alpha (CCTalpha), as well as a decline in choline kinase, suggesting altogether a downregulation of the phosphatidylcholine biosynthetic pathway. In addition, we found decreased levels of the protein methyl transferase PRMT2 and the upregulation of the histone deacetylase Sirtuin1 (Sirt1). Analysis of the human prostate cancer samples revealed similar results in a population with high expressions of the stem cell markers Oct4 and ABCB1A1. Our findings suggest that the adaptation of prostate cancer cells to antiandrogens could induce reprogramming into stem cells that survive in a low phosphocholine metabolism and cell cycle arrest and display drug resistance.
CONTEXT: Flutamide (FLT) has poor aqueous solubility and low oral bioavailability. OBJECTIVE: Lyophilization monophase solution was used for preparing lyophilized dispersions of FLT with polyols and amino acids to increase its poor dissolution. METHODS: Physical properties and dissolution behavior of their physical mixtures and lyophilized dispersions were investigated. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The carriers increased the aqueous solubility of FLT but to a limited extent with arginine and glycine showing a linear A(L)-phase solubility diagrams. Gas chromatography indicated that residual tertiary butyl alcohol was in range of 0.007-0.023% (w/w) in the dispersions. In all dispersions, the crystal structure of FLT was confirmed using differential scanning calorimetry, X-ray diffractometry, and scanning electron microscopy. However, the percent drug crystallinity was found to decrease with increasing the carrier content. Infrared spectroscopy revealed no interaction between drug and carriers. The particle size of FLT dispersions ranged between 0.61 and 1.81 mum, with a high surface area (293.93-465.37 m(2)/g) and porosity (447.69-754.33 e(-3) mL/g). In addition, the poor flow properties of FLT were improved but to a limited extent. FLT dissolution from the dispersions was enhanced with 46.35% and 36.43% of FLT dissolved after 30 minutes from 1:5 FLT-mannitol and FLT-trehalose dispersions, respectively, compared with only 13.45% of pure FLT. On the other hand, after 30 minutes 38.57% and 46.78% of FLT was dissolved from 1:3 FLT-arginine and FLT-glycine dispersions, respectively. CONCLUSION: These data suggest that polyols and amino acids might be useful adjuncts in preparation of immediate-release formulations of FLT.
Disseminated intravascular clotting (DIC) is a well-recognized complication of malignancy. Prostatic cancer can produce chronic DIC as well as acute severe DIC. Treatment of DIC are general supportive measures including heparin, transfusion of blood, platelets and clotting factors, but the most important aspect is correction of underlying malignant diseases i.e. cancer of the prostate gland. For metastatic prostatic cancer presenting with an emergency oncologic condition, the treatment of choice is surgical orchiectomy, but surgery may not be possible in the presence of severe DIC. Ketoconazole and Flutamide are drugs with different mechanisms for hormonal manipulation of this cancer. Due to severe DIC, we combined both drugs trying to put maximum therapeutic effect on this life threatening profound DIC patient.
Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide is the most widely used complementary therapy in cancer. The present study aims to investigate the possible interaction between Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide and Docetaxel (a chemotherapy drug) and the first-line medication for prostate cancer treatment (Flutamide) and sensitizing the cells to these treatments. The cytotoxic effects of Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide in combination with Docetaxel and Flutamide on prostate cancer cells were investigated by the MTT test, Hoechst staining, and flow cytometry. In addition, the expression of genes related to apoptosis, angiogenesis, Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition pathway (EMT), and prostate cancer biomarkers by Real-Time PCR was investigated. The results demonstrated that IC50 values for Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide (30 muM and 20 muM), Docetaxel (10 muM and 5 muM), and Flutamide (20 muM and 12 muM) with MTT were confirmed by flow cytometry in a dose and time-dependent manner. Regarding the high efficacy of Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide in combination with Flutamide and Docetaxel, 10 muM and 5 muM Flutamide were used instead of 20 muM and 12 muM and 5 muM and 2 muM Docetaxel was used instead of 10 muM and 5 muM in PC3 and LNCap, respectively. Moreover, for the first time, it was shown that Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide alone and in combination with Docetaxel and Flutamide significantly augmented apoptosis, reduced cell migration and colonization, and downregulated expression of KLK2 and EMT pathway genes in both PC3 and LNCap cell line (P < 0.01). Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide synergistically increased the effect of Docetaxel and Flutamide and increased the sensitivity of the prostate cancer cell lines to these drugs. Therefore, it may provide a new therapeutic strategy against prostate cancer.
To investigate the clinical efficacy and safety of the finasteride (5 mg/day) plus flutamide (125 mg/day) combination therapy in unselected women with hirsutism, 44 women were involved in the study. The effects of such combination treatment have not been reported previously. The patients were assigned to 3 treatment groups: 14 patients (group 1) were treated with finasteride (5 mg per day), 16 patients (group 2) were treated with flutamide (125 mg per day), and 14 patients (group 3) were treated with finasteride (5 mg per day) plus flutamide (125 mg per day) for 12 months. Serum FSH, LH, estradiol, total testosterone, free testosterone, androstenedione, DHEAS, and SHBG were obtained. Hirsutism score was measured before and after treatment. Blood chemistry and side effects were evaluated during the study. The reductions in hirsutism score (% of the baseline) at 6 months were as follows: 24% for group 1, 35% for group 2, and 33% for group 3. Combination therapy resulted in (49%) similar improvement to flutamide alone (45%), but significantly (p<0.05) more efficacious improvement in hirsutism when compared to finasteride (32%) after 12 months of treatment. In conclusion, flutamide is more effective than finasteride and the combination of these two drugs is not better than flutamide alone, but better than finasteride in hirsute women.
Flutamide, an antiandrogen drug, is widely used for the treatment of prostate cancer. The major metabolic pathways of flutamide are hydroxylation and hydrolysis. The hydrolyzed metabolite, 5-amino-2-nitrobenzotrifluoride (FLU-1), is further metabolized to N-hydroxy FLU-1, an assumed hepatotoxicant. Our previous study demonstrated that arylacetamide deacetylase (AADAC), one of the major serine esterases expressed in the human liver and gastrointestinal tract, catalyzes the flutamide hydrolysis. However, the enzyme kinetics in human tissue microsomes were not consistent with the kinetics by recombinant human AADAC. Thus, it seemed that AADAC is not the sole enzyme responsible for flutamide hydrolysis in human. In the present study, we found that recombinant carboxylesterase (CES) 2 could hydrolyze flutamide at low concentrations of flutamide. In the inhibition assay, the flutamide hydrolase activities at a flutamide concentration of 5 muM in human liver and jejunum microsomes were strongly inhibited by a selective CES2 inhibitor, 10 muM loperamide, with the residual activities of 22.9 +/- 3.5 and 18.6 +/- 0.7%, respectively. These results suggest that CES2 is also involved in the flutamide hydrolysis in human tissues. Using six individual human livers, the contributions of AADAC and CES2 to flutamide hydrolysis were estimated by using the relative activity factor. The relative contribution of CES2 was approximately 75 to 99% at the concentration of 5 muM flutamide. In contrast, the relative contribution of AADAC increased in parallel with the concentration of flutamide. Thus, CES2, rather than AADAC, largely contributed to the flutamide hydrolysis in clinical therapeutics.
The article describes the preparation and characterization of binary mixtures of two antiandrogens used in prostate cancer treatment, i.e. flutamide (FL) and bicalutamide (BIC), as well as their ternary mixtures with either poly(methyl methacrylate-co-ethyl acrylate) (MMA/EA) or polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP). The samples were converted into amorphous form to improve their water solubility and dissolution rate. Broadband dielectric spectroscopy and differential scanning calorimetry revealed that FL-BIC (65%) (w/w) does not tend to crystallize from the supercooled liquid state. We made the assumption that the drug-to-drug weight ratio should be maintained as in the case of monotherapy so we decided to investigate the system containing FL and BIC in 15:1 (w/w) ratio with 30% additive of polymers as stabilizers. Our research has shown that only in the case of the FL-BIC-PVP mixture the crystallization has been completely inhibited, both in glassy and supercooled liquid state, which was confirmed by X-ray diffraction studies. In addition, we performed solubility and dissolution rate tests, which showed a significant improvement in solubility of ternary system as compared to its crystalline counterpart. Enhanced physical stability and water solubility of the amorphous ternary system makes it promising for further studies.
Flutamide is a non-steroidal antiandrogenic drug devoid of hormonal agonist activity. Flutamide appears to be a specific antiandrogen only at androgen-dependent accessory genital organs. Its pharmacological activity is due substantially to the principal metabolite, 2-hydroxyflutamide. In comparative trials involving small numbers of patients with previously untreated advanced prostatic cancer, flutamide 750mg daily is comparable with stilboestrol 1 or 3mg daily and with estramustine 560 or 840mg daily. Treatment of newly diagnosed advanced prostatic cancer with flutamide plus a luteinising hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) agonist has produced very promising results, and appears to prolong survival relative to that achieved with leuprolide alone. However, these results require confirmation in suitably designed prospective studies. In previously treated patients refractory to castration, flutamide 750mg daily appears comparable in efficacy to estramustine phosphate 600 mg/m2 daily. Apart from a high incidence (34 to 100%) of gynaecomastia flutamide monotherapy is usually well tolerated, and has the advantage of preserving libido and sexual potency in at least 80% of patients. Gynaecomastia is infrequent, however, when flutamide is used in conjunction with surgical castration or an LHRH agonist. Thus, flutamide is a suitable alternative to other systemic treatment in patients with advanced prostatic cancer who wish to preserve sexual potency. In combination with an LHRH agonist flutamide may become a first-line agent for previously untreated patients with cancer of the prostate.
Human serum albumin (HSA) is the most abundant protein in plasma with a high ligand-binding capacity. This capacity impacts the pharmacokinetic properties of therapeutic drugs. In the present study, the binding properties of flutamide to HSA at different temperatures, pHs and percentages of HSA were investigated. Thermodynamic parameters were also determined to describe the nature of binding interaction. A modified ultrafiltration method was used for accurate determination of flutamide-HSA parameters. Ultra filtrate samples containing free flutamide were extracted and analyzed by developed HPLC-UV method. Analysis of binding data was performed in terms of Scatchard, Klotz and Hill plots. Kinetic parameters (n, K(a)) were found to be affected by temperature, pH and HSA concentration. However, flutamide-HSA-binding level did not show significant differences under different experimental conditions. The negative value of Gibbs free energy (DeltaG) indicated that the binding was spontaneous. Moreover, the negative value for enthalpy and entropy changes suggested that hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces played major role in the binding of flutamide to HSA. The results suggested a positive cooperation behavior of flutamide-HSA-binding that was affected by pH, temperature and percentage of HSA.
CONTEXT: The few controlled trials performed so far indicate that the addition of metformin and/or flutamide to a hypocaloric diet in obese women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) effectively influences different phenotypic aspects of the syndrome. All these studies are, however, characterized by a short to medium period of treatment. OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate the long-term effects of these therapies. DESIGN AND SETTING: We conducted a prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled trial at a medical center. PATIENTS: Of 80 overweight-obese women with PCOS, 76 completed the study. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were placed on a hypocaloric diet for the first month and then on a hypocaloric diet plus placebo, metformin (850 mg, orally, twice a day), flutamide (250 mg, orally, twice a day), or metformin plus flutamide for the subsequent 12 months (20 subjects in each group). MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We assessed clinical features, computerized tomography measurement of fat distribution, androgens, lipids, and fasting and glucose-stimulated glucose and insulin levels at baseline and after 6 and 12 months of treatment. RESULTS: After 6 months, compared with placebo, flutamide further decreased visceral/sc fat mass (P = 0.044), androstenedione (P < 0.001), dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (P < 0.001), and hirsutism score (P < 0.001), whereas metformin further increased frequency of menstruation (P = 0.039). After 12 months, flutamide maintained the effects observed after 6 months on visceral/sc fat mass (P = 0.033) and androstenedione (P < 0.001), whereas it produced an additional decrease in dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (P = 0.020) and hirsutism score (P = 0.019); metformin further improved the menstrual pattern (P = 0.013). Moreover, after 12 months, flutamide improved more than placebo the menstrual pattern (P = 0.008), glucose-stimulated glucose levels (P = 0.041), insulin sensitivity (P < 0.001), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels (P = 0.003), whereas metformin decreased glucose-stimulated insulin levels (P = 0.014). The combination of the two drugs maintained the specific effect of each of the compounds, without any additive or synergistic effect. CONCLUSIONS: These findings add relevance to the usefulness of metformin and flutamide in the treatment of dieting overweight-obese PCOS women and provide a rationale for targeting different therapeutic options according to the required outcomes in the long term.
