BACKGROUND: Nanoliposomal irinotecan showed activity in a phase 2 study in patients with metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma previously treated with gemcitabine-based therapies. We assessed the effect of nanoliposomal irinotecan alone or combined with fluorouracil and folinic acid in a phase 3 trial in this population. METHODS: We did a global, phase 3, randomised, open-label trial at 76 sites in 14 countries. Eligible patients with metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma previously treated with gemcitabine-based therapy were randomly assigned (1:1) using an interactive web response system at a central location to receive either nanoliposomal irinotecan monotherapy (120 mg/m(2) every 3 weeks, equivalent to 100 mg/m(2) of irinotecan base) or fluorouracil and folinic acid. A third arm consisting of nanoliposomal irinotecan (80 mg/m(2), equivalent to 70 mg/m(2) of irinotecan base) with fluorouracil and folinic acid every 2 weeks was added later (1:1:1), in a protocol amendment. Randomisation was stratified by baseline albumin, Karnofsky performance status, and ethnic origin. Treatment was continued until disease progression or intolerable toxic effects. The primary endpoint was overall survival, assessed in the intention-to-treat population. The primary analysis was planned after 305 events. Safety was assessed in all patients who had received study drug. This trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01494506. FINDINGS: Between Jan 11, 2012, and Sept 11, 2013, 417 patients were randomly assigned either nanoliposomal irinotecan plus fluorouracil and folinic acid (n=117), nanoliposomal irinotecan monotherapy (n=151), or fluorouracil and folinic acid (n=149). After 313 events, median overall survival in patients assigned nanoliposomal irinotecan plus fluorouracil and folinic acid was 6.1 months (95% CI 4.8-8.9) vs 4.2 months (3.3-5.3) with fluorouracil and folinic acid (hazard ratio 0.67, 95% CI 0.49-0.92; p=0.012). Median overall survival did not differ between patients assigned nanoliposomal irinotecan monotherapy and those allocated fluorouracil and folinic acid (4.9 months [4.2-5.6] vs 4.2 months [3.6-4.9]; 0.99, 0.77-1.28; p=0.94). The grade 3 or 4 adverse events that occurred most frequently in the 117 patients assigned nanoliposomal irinotecan plus fluorouracil and folinic acid were neutropenia (32 [27%]), diarrhoea (15 [13%]), vomiting (13 [11%]), and fatigue (16 [14%]). INTERPRETATION: Nanoliposomal irinotecan in combination with fluorouracil and folinic acid extends survival with a manageable safety profile in patients with metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma who previously received gemcitabine-based therapy. This agent represents a new treatment option for this population. FUNDING: Merrimack Pharmaceuticals.
Methylation is an essential biochemical mechanism that is central to the transmission of life, and crucially responsible for regulating gametogenesis and continued embryo development. The methylation of DNA and histones drives cell division and regulation of gene expression through epigenesis and imprinting. Brain development and its maturation also depend on correct lipid methylation, and continued neuronal function depends on biogenic amines that require methylation for their synthesis. All methylation processes are carried out via a methyltransferase enzyme and its unique co-factor S-adenosylmethionine (SAM); the transfer of a methyl group to a target molecule results in the release of SAH (SA homocysteine), and then homocysteine (Hcy). Both of these molecules are toxic, inhibiting methylation in a variety of ways, and Hcy recycling to methionine is imperative; this is achieved via the one carbon cycle, supported by the folates cycle. Folate deficiency causes hyperhomocysteinaemia, with several associated diseases; during early pregnancy, deficiency interferes with closure of the neural tube at the fourth week of gestation, and nutraceutical supplementation has been routinely prescribed to prevent neural tube defects, mainly involving B vitamins, Zn and folates. The two metabolic pathways are subject to single nucleotide polymorphisms that alter their activity/capacity, often severely, impairing specific physiological functions including fertility, brain and cardiac function. The impact of three types of nutraceutical supplements, folic acid (FA), folinic acid (FLA) and 5 Methyl THF (MTHF), will be discussed here, with their positive effects alongside potentially hazardous secondary effects. The issue surrounding FA and its association with UMFA (unmetabolized folic acid) syndrome is now a matter of concern, as UMFA is currently found in the umbilical cord of the fetus, and even in infants' blood. We will discuss its putative role in influencing the acquisition of epigenetic marks in the germline, acquired during embryogenesis, as well as the role of FA in the management of cancerous disease.
BACKGROUND: Methotrexate (MTX) is a disease modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) used as a first line agent for treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Pharmacologically, it is classified as an antimetabolite due to its antagonistic effect on folic acid metabolism. Many patients treated with MTX experience mucosal, gastrointestinal, hepatic or haematologic side effects. Supplementation with folic or folinic acid during treatment with MTX may ameliorate these side effects. OBJECTIVES: To identify trials of supplementation with folic acid or folinic acid during MTX therapy for rheumatoid arthritis and to assess the benefits and harms of folic acid and folinic acid (a) in reducing the mucosal, gastrointestinal (GI), hepatic and haematologic side effects of MTX, and (b) whether or not folic or folinic acid supplementation has any effect on MTX benefit. SEARCH METHODS: We originally performed MEDLINE searches, from January 1966 to June 1999. During the update of this review, we searched additional databases and used a sensitive search strategy designed to retrieve all trials on folic acid or folinic acid for rheumatoid arthritis from 1999 up to 2 March 2012. SELECTION CRITERIA: We selected all double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled clinical trials (RCTs) in which adult patients with rheumatoid arthritis were treated with MTX (at a dose equal to or less than 25 mg/week) concurrently with folate supplementation. In this update of the review we only included trials using 'low dose' folic or folinic acid (a starting dose of </= 7 mg weekly). DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Data were extracted from the trials, and the trials were independently assessed for risk of bias using a predetermined set of criteria. MAIN RESULTS: Six trials with 624 patients were eligible for inclusion. Most studies had low or unclear risk of bias for key domains. The quality of the evidence was rated as 'moderate' for each outcome as assessed by GRADE, with the exception of haematologic side effects which were rated as 'low'. There was no significant heterogeneity between trials, including where folic acid and folinic acid studies were pooled.For patients supplemented with any form of exogenous folate (either folic or folinic acid) whilst on MTX therapy for rheumatoid arthritis, a 26% relative (9% absolute) risk reduction was seen for the incidence of GI side effects such as nausea, vomiting or abdominal pain (RR 0.74, 95% CI 0.59 to 0.92; P = 0.008). Folic and folinic acid also appear to be protective against abnormal serum transaminase elevation caused by MTX, with a 76.9% relative (16% absolute) risk reduction (RR 0.23, 95% CI 0.15 to 0.34; P < 0.00001), as well as reducing patient withdrawal from MTX for any reason (60.8% relative (15.2% absolute) risk reduction, RR 0.39, 95% CI 0.28 to 0.53; P < 0.00001).We analysed the effect of folic or folinic acid on the incidence of stomatitis / mouth sores, and whilst showing a trend towards reduction in risk, the results were not statistically significant (RR 0.72, 95% CI 0.49 to 1.06)It was not possible to draw meaningful conclusions on the effect of folic or folinic acid on haematologic side effects of methotrexate due to small numbers of events and poor reporting of this outcome in included trials.It does not appear that supplementation with either folic or folinic acid has a statistically significant effect on the efficacy of MTX in treating RA (as measured by RA disease activity parameters such as tender and swollen joint counts, or physician's global assessment scores). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The results support a protective effect of supplementation with either folic or folinic acid for patients with rheumatoid arthritis during treatment with MTX.There was a significant reduction shown in the incidence of GI side effects, hepatic dysfunction (asmeasured by elevated serum transaminase levels) as well as a significant reduction in discontinuation of MTX treatment for any reason. A trend towards a reduction in stomatitis was demonstrated however this did not reach statistical significance.This updated review with its focus on lower doses of folic acid and folinic acid and updated assessment of risk of bias aimed to give a more precise and more clinically relevant estimate of the benefit of folate supplementation for patients with rheumatoid arthritis receiving methotrexate.
Iron deficiency in pregnancy is a major public health problem that causes maternal complications. The objective of this randomized, controlled trial was to examine the bioavailability, efficacy, and safety of oral ferrous bisglycinate plus folinic acid supplementation in pregnant women with iron deficiency. Subjects (12-16 weeks of gestation, n = 120) were randomly allocated to receive oral iron as ferrous bisglycinate (equiv. iron 24 mg) in supplement form with folinic acid and multivitamins (test group, n = 60) or as ferrous fumarate (equiv. iron 66 mg iron, control group, n = 60) after breakfast daily. Iron absorption was assessed by measuring fasted serum iron levels at 1 and 2 h immediately after supplementation. Hematological biomarkers and iron status were assessed before intervention, and at 3 and 6 months. Side effects were monitored throughout the intervention. A significant increase in serum iron was seen in both groups (p < 0.001) during the bioavailability assessment; however, the test group increases were comparatively higher than the control values at each timepoint (p < 0.001). Similarly, both test and control groups demonstrated a statistically significant increases in hemoglobin (Hb) (p < 0.001), erythrocytes (p < 0.001), reticulocytes (p < 0.001), mean corpuscular volume (MCV) (p < 0.001), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) (p < 0.001), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) (p < 0.001), % transferrin saturation (p < 0.001), and ferritin (p < 0.001) at 3 and 6 months after supplementation. However, in all cases, the test group increases were numerically larger than the control group increases at each timepoint. The test intervention was also associated with significantly fewer reports of nausea, abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, or metallic taste (p < 0.001). In conclusion, ferrous bisglycinate with folinic acid as a multivitamin nutraceutical format is comparable to standard ferrous fumarate for the clinical management of iron deficiency during pregnancy, with comparatively better absorption, tolerability, and efficacy and with a lower elemental iron dosage.
We sought to determine whether high-dose folinic acid improves verbal communication in children with non-syndromic autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and language impairment in a double-blind placebo control setting. Forty-eight children (mean age 7 years 4  months; 82% male) with ASD and language impairment were randomized to receive 12 weeks of high-dose folinic acid (2 mg kg(-1) per day, maximum 50 mg per day; n=23) or placebo (n=25). Children were subtyped by glutathione and folate receptor-alpha autoantibody (FRAA) status. Improvement in verbal communication, as measured by a ability-appropriate standardized instrument, was significantly greater in participants receiving folinic acid as compared with those receiving placebo, resulting in an effect of 5.7 (1.0,10.4) standardized points with a medium-to-large effect size (Cohen's d=0.70). FRAA status was predictive of response to treatment. For FRAA-positive participants, improvement in verbal communication was significantly greater in those receiving folinic acid as compared with those receiving placebo, resulting in an effect of 7.3 (1.4,13.2) standardized points with a large effect size (Cohen's d=0.91), indicating that folinic acid treatment may be more efficacious in children with ASD who are FRAA positive. Improvements in subscales of the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale, the Aberrant Behavior Checklist, the Autism Symptom Questionnaire and the Behavioral Assessment System for Children were significantly greater in the folinic acid group as compared with the placebo group. There was no significant difference in adverse effects between treatment groups. Thus, in this small trial of children with non-syndromic ASD and language impairment, treatment with high-dose folinic acid for 12 weeks resulted in improvement in verbal communication as compared with placebo, particularly in those participants who were positive for FRAAs.
The folate cycle has been implicated in the pathophysiology of autism due to its role in the glutathione oxidative stress pathway, amino acid and DNA methylation reactions, and neurotransmitter synthesis pathway. Previous research on folinic acid supplementation in autistic children has suggested potential benefits. The primary aim of this pilot study was to determine the safety, feasibility and efficacy of oral folinic acid in improving communication and behaviour in autistic children. Ten autistic children were recruited into an open-label pre-post treatment within-subjects design study. At T = 0, 12 and 24 weeks, participants underwent safety evaluations, standardized assessments of language, autism symptoms, adaptive skills and global illness severity, and eye-gaze tracking. During the control period (0-12 weeks), participants continued with standard care. In the treatment period (12-24 weeks), participants took oral folinic acid at 2 mg/kg/day. All 10 children (nine boys, one girl; aged 4-8 years), successfully consumed oral folinic acid supplements with no adverse events. There was a reduction in Pervasive Developmental Disorder Behavior Inventory (PDDBI) Autism Composite T-score with treatment (mean [SD] T-score 49.2 [8.89] pre-treatment, 44.6 [6.19] post-treatment, p = 0.103). Although this difference was not statistically significant due to the small sample size, the effect size was medium-large, indicating that, as a group, there were clinically meaningful changes in PDDBI T-scores. There were also trends towards gains in communication scores and overall Clinical Global Impression scores. Folinic acid is a safe and feasible potential treatment for autism, and results from this pilot justify the need for a larger placebo-controlled trial.
BACKGROUND - AIM: Hyperhomocysteinemia is recognized as a risk factor for several diseases and conditions. The aim of this study was to investigate and compare the efficacy of two total homocysteine (tHcy)-lowering treatments including folinic acid or l-methylfolate in healthy Greek adults. METHODS: Two hundred and seventy-two healthy Greek adults (143 men, 129 women; mean age+/-SD: 43.0 +/- 15.3 years), with serum tHcy levels >/=10 mumol/L received randomized folinic acid ("Folinic acid Group") or l-methylfolate ("l-methylfolate Group") orally for three months. All subjects with serum cobalamin (Cbl) levels <300 pg/mL additionally received 1 mg hydroxycobalamine intramuscularly twice a week for the first month only. Serum folate, Cbl and tHcy levels were determined using immunoassays methods at the beginning and the end of the study period. The MTHFR C677T and MTHFR A1298C gene polymorphisms were genotyped using polymerase chain reaction and reverse hybridization. RESULTS: At the end of the 3-month intervention period, the levels of serum folate and Cbl increased significantly, whereas the levels of serum tHcy decreased significantly in the two groups. The individuals with MTHFR 677TT genotype had a significantly higher reduction in serum tHcy levels than the individuals with the MTHFR 677CC or MTHFR 677CT genotypes. Although the "Folinic acid Group" had a considerably higher increase in their serum folate levels (but not Cbl) than the "l-methylfolate Group", the reduction of serum tHcy levels between the two groups was not substantially different. The individuals with MTHFR 677CT genotype had a statistically significant higher reduction in serum tHcy levels when supplemented with folinic acid rather than l-methylfolate. CONCLUSIONS: The administration of folinic acid compared to l-methylfolate caused a higher increase of serum folate levels but no difference in the reduction of serum tHcy levels. The reduction of serum tHcy levels was influenced by the existence of MTHFR C677T and not MTHFR A1298C gene polymorphisms. The individuals with MTHFR 677CT genotype appear to benefit more by folinic acid than l-methylfolate supplementation.
High-dose methotrexate (HDMTX) is active against various malignancies; it possesses serious toxicities and is associated with patient characteristics, dosage regimens, comedications, and physiological status. There are many strategies to overcome HDMTX-induced toxicities, such as hydration, alkalization, leucovorin rescue, and haemodialysis. Leucovorin rescue is a cornerstone for toxicity prevention in HDMTX treatment. However, the leucovorin dose adjustment and the existence of leucovorin overrescue are still controversial. At present, various methods for calculating leucovorin doses in different tumour types have been proposed, including empirical calculations based on MTX plasma concentration, the Bleyer nomogram, and other methods. Nonetheless, leucovorin rescue protocols differ greatly across tumour types and medical institutions. Further studies are needed to investigate the optimal dosage regimen for leucovorin rescue in various tumours using HDMTX.
This is a double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized trial to investigate the potential therapeutic effects of folinic acid/placebo as an adjuvant to risperidone on inappropriate speech and other behavioral symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Fifty-five ASD children (age (mean +/- standard deviation) = 13.40 +/- 2.00; male/female: 35/20) were evaluated for behavioral symptoms at baseline, week 5, and week 10 using the aberrant behavior checklist-community (ABC-C). Folinic acid dosage was 2 mg/kg up to 50 mg per day for the entire course of the study. The repeated measures analysis showed significant effect for time x treatment interaction on inappropriate speech (F = 3.51; df = 1.61; P = 0.044), stereotypic behavior (F = 4.02; df = 1.37; P = 0.036), and hyperactivity/noncompliance (F = 6.79; df = 1.66; P = 0.003) subscale scores. In contrast, no significant effect for time x treatment interaction was found on lethargy/social withdrawal (F = 1.06; df = 1.57; P = 0.336) and irritability (F = 2.86; df = 1.91; P = 0.064) subscale scores. Our study provided preliminary evidence suggesting that folinic acid could be recommended as a beneficial complementary supplement for alleviating speech and behavioral symptoms in children with ASD.Clinical trial registeration: This trial was registered in the Iranian Registry of Clinical Trials ( www.irct.ir ; No. IRCT20090117001556N114).
Twenty consecutive patients with advanced breast cancer were treated with a combination of cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 i.v. on day 1, epidoxorubicin 75 mg/m2 on day 1, and 5-fluorouracil 375 mg/m2 i.v. with folinic acid 200 mg/m2 i.v. on days 1----3. The overall response rate was 60%, with 10% of patients showing a complete response with a mean duration of 11.1 + months, and 50% of patients a partial response of 7.4 + months. A stabilization of 5.2 + months was obtained in 20% of cases, while 20% of patients progressed. The most frequently observed toxicity was leukopenia, while expected mucosal toxicities were rather mild.
OBJECTIVE: To perform a systematic review of the benefits and harms of folic acid and folinic acid in reducing the mucosal, gastrointestinal, hepatic, and hematologic side effects of methotrexate (MTX); and to assess whether folic or folinic acid supplementation has any effect on MTX benefit. METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Library, MEDLINE, EMBASE, and US National Institutes of Health clinical trials registry from inception to March 2012. We selected all double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials in which adult patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were treated with MTX (dose </= 25 mg/week) concurrently with folate supplementation. We included only trials using low-dose folic or folinic acid (a starting dose of </= 7 mg weekly) because the high dose is no longer recommended or used. Data were extracted from the trials, and the trials were independently assessed for risk of bias using a predetermined set of criteria. RESULTS: Six trials with 624 patients were eligible for inclusion. Most studies had low or unclear risk of bias for key domains. The quality of the evidence was rated as "moderate" for each outcome as assessed by the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) working group, with the exception of hematologic side effects, which were rated as "low." There was no significant heterogeneity between trials, including where folic acid and folinic acid studies were pooled. For patients supplemented with any form of exogenous folate (either folic or folinic acid) while receiving MTX therapy for RA, a 26% relative (9% absolute) risk reduction was seen for the incidence of gastrointestinal side effects such as nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain (RR 0.74, 95% CI 0.59 to 0.92; p = 0.008). Folic and folinic acid also appear to be protective against abnormal serum transaminase elevation caused by MTX, with a 76.9% relative (16% absolute) risk reduction (RR 0.23, 95% CI 0.15 to 0.34; p < 0.00001), as well as reducing patient withdrawal from MTX for any reason [60.8% relative (15.2% absolute) risk reduction, RR 0.39, 95% CI 0.28 to 0.53; p < 0.00001]. CONCLUSION: The results support a protective effect of supplementation with either folic or folinic acid for patients with RA during treatment with MTX. There was a clinically important significant reduction shown in the incidence of GI side effects and hepatic dysfunction (as measured by elevated serum transaminase levels), as well as a clinically important significant reduction in discontinuation of MTX treatment for any reason.
BACKGROUND: The key endpoints for the assessment of the effect of maintenance therapy for metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) are survival and quality-of-life outcomes. We aimed to compare dermatology-related quality of life (DRQOL) in patients with RAS wild-type (wt) mCRC treated with fluorouracil and folinic acid (FU/FA) + panitumumab (Pmab) versus FU/FA alone as maintenance therapy after folinic acid, fluorouracil and oxaliplatin + Pmab induction. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The phase II randomized PanaMa (AIO KRK 0212; NCT01991873) trial included 387 patients at 70 community/academic sites in Germany. For this prespecified secondary analysis, DRQOL outcomes were assessed using the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor (FACT-EGFRI), Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI), and Skindex-16 questionnaires at every second cycle of therapy until disease progression/death. RESULTS: At least one DRQOL questionnaire was completed by a total of 310/377 (82%) patients who received induction therapy, and by 216/248 (87%) patients who were randomized and received maintenance therapy. Patients who experienced skin toxicity according to the National Cancer Institute (NCI)-Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) during induction therapy had significantly worse DRQOL according to all three measures, compared to those who did not [i.e. Skindex-16, mean difference at cycle 2 -12.87; 95% confidence interval (CI) -20.01 to -5.73; P < 0.001]. During maintenance therapy, significantly improved recovery was observed in all DRQOL measures for patients receiving FU/FA, compared to those receiving additional Pmab (i.e. Skindex-16, mean difference at cycle 6 -16.53; 95% CI -22.68 to -10.38; P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: In this secondary analysis of a phase II randomized clinical trial, patient-reported DRQOL outcomes correlated with skin toxicity according to NCI-CTCAE during induction therapy. Maintenance therapy with FU/FA + Pmab was associated with deteriorated DRQOL versus FU/FA alone in patients with RAS wt mCRC.
Oral folinic acid has shown potential to improve symptoms in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are limited. This double-blind, placebo-controlled RCT aimed to compare changes in Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) scores in children with ASD aged 2-10 years, among folinic acid (2 mg/kg/day, maximum of 50 mg/day) and placebo groups at 24 weeks, in comparison with baseline. Both the groups received standard care (ABA and sensory integration therapy). Secondary objectives included changes in behavioral problems measured by the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) and serum levels of anti-folate receptor autoantibodies and folic acid, correlated with changes in autism symptom severity. Out of the 40 participants recruited in each group, 39 and 38 participants completed the 24-week follow-up in the folinic acid and placebo groups, respectively. The change in CARS score was higher in the folinic acid group (3.6 +/- 0.8) compared to the placebo group (2.4 +/- 0.7, p < 0.001). Changes in CBCL total score and CBCL internalizing score were also better in the folinic acid group (19.7 +/- 9.5 vs. 12.6 +/- 8.4 and 15.4 +/- 7.8 vs. 8.5 +/- 5.7, p < 0.001 for both). High-titer anti-folate receptor autoantibodies were positive in 32/40 and 33/40 cases in the folinic acid and placebo groups, respectively (p = 0.78). In the placebo group, improvement in CARS score was comparable regardless of autoantibody status (p = 0.11), but in the folinic acid group, improvement was more pronounced in the high-titer autoantibody group (p = 0.03). No adverse reactions were reported in either group. CONCLUSIONS: Oral folinic acid supplementation is effective and safe in improving ASD symptoms, with more pronounced benefits in children with high titers of folate receptor autoantibodies. TRIAL REGISTRATION:  CTRI/2021/07/034901, dated 15-07-2021. WHAT IS KNOWN: * Folate receptor autoantibodies are more prevalent in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) compared to typically developing children. * Folate receptor autoantibodies play a significant role in the neuropathogenesis of autism spectrum disorder. WHAT IS NEW: * Add-on oral folinic acid supplementation is safe and effective in reducing the severity of symptoms in children with ASD. * The clinical benefits are more pronounced in children with high titers of folate receptor autoantibodies.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of folic acid and folinic acid in reducing the mucosal and gastrointestinal (GI) and haematologic side effects of low-dose of Methotrexate (MTX) in patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) and to determine whether or not folate supplementation alters MTX efficacy. SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Controlled Clinical Trial's Register (CCTR), the Cochrane Musculoskeletal Group Specialized Register and Medline up to and including June 1999, using the search strategy developed by the Cochrane Collaboration (Dickersin 1994). We also handsearched the following: (i) bibliographic references; (ii) current contents of the last 6 months; (iii) abstracts of the rheumatology meetings; and (iv) all issues of four journals; Journal of Rheumatology, Arthritis & Rheumatism, Clinical and Experimental Rheumatology, and British Journal of Rheumatology. All languages were included. Principal investigators were also contacted in order to look for unpublished literature. SELECTION CRITERIA: We selected all double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trials (RCTs), in which adult RA patients were treated with a low dose of MTX (<20 mg / week) concurrently with folate supplementation. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two observers extracted the data and assessed the quality of the trials. (BS, Z0) The overall treatment effect across trials was calculated using a fixed effect model. Disease activity was evaluated using standardized mean differences to ensure comparability across outcome measures. Results are presented with 95% Confidence Inervals (95% CI). Subgroup analyses were conducted evaluating different doses and sensitivity analysis looking at the quality of the trials. Publication bias was assessed with an inverted funnel plot technique. Heterogeneity of the trials was measured using a standard chi square test. Costs per month in different countries were compared. MAIN RESULTS: Of the 12 trials retrieved, 7 met the inclusion criteria. The total sample included 307 patients, of which 147 were treated with folate supplementation, 80 patients with folinic acid and 67 patients with folic acid. A 79% reduction in mucosal and GI side effects was observed for folic acid [OR = 0.21 (95% CI 0.10 to 0.44)]. For folinic acid, a clinically but non-statistically significant reduction of 43% was found [OR = 0. 57 (95% CI 0.28 to 1.15)]. No major differences were observed between low and high doses of folic or folinic acid. Haematologic side effects could not be analyzed, since details of each haematologic side effect by patients were not provided. No consistent differences in disease activity parameters were observed when comparing placebo and folic or folinic acid at low or high doses, although patients on high dose folinic acid had an increase in the number of tender joints, but not swollen joints. Large differences in costs across countries were found, but folinic acid was more expensive in all. REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: The results support the protective effect of folate supplementation in reducing MTX side effects related to the oral and GI systems. We could not determine if folic was different from folinic acid. Therefore, for folinic acid to be considered cost-effective it must be found more effective than folic acid at reducing MTX side effects.
High concentration pyridoxal 5'-phosphate, the cofactor of vitamin B6, potentiates cytotoxicity in cancer cells exposed to 5-fluorouracil (FUra) and folinic acid (FA). We studied the effect of high-dose pyridoxine on antitumor activity of regimens comprising FUra and FA in 27 advanced breast carcinoma patients. Of 18 previously untreated patients, 12 had tumors that did not overexpress HER2 (Group I), and 6 that overexpressed HER2 (Group II). Nine patients (Group III) had prior chemotherapy. Group I received AVCF (doxorubicin, vinorelbine, cyclophosphamide, FUra, FA) or FAC (doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, FUra, FA) followed by TCbF (paclitaxel carboplatin, FUra, FA). Groups II, and III received TCbF. Pyridoxine iv (1000-3000 mg/day) preceded each FA and FUra. Group II also received trastuzumab and pertuzumab. 26 patients responded. Three patients in Group I had CRs and 9 had PRs with 62-98% reduction rates; 4 patients in Group II had CRs and 2 had PRs with 98% reduction. Of 7 measurable patients in Group III, 2 attained CRs, and 5 had PRs with 81-94% reduction rates. Median time to response was 3.4 months. Unexpected toxicity did not occur. This pilot study suggests that high-dose vitamin B6 enhances antitumor potency of regimens comprising FUra and FA.
Forty patients with metastatic breast cancer were treated with a new combination regimen consisting of cyclophosphamide, epirubicin, high-dose folinic acid and 5-fluorouracil (super-FEC). A major objective response was observed in 32 patients (80%). Among these, 11 patients (27%) experienced a complete remission. The median duration of response was 10+ and 12+ months for CR and PR, respectively. The most common side-effect was oral mucositis (Grade III = nine patients; grade IV = two patients), while haematological toxicity was virtually absent. Considering the high-risk characteristics of the vast majority of the enrolled patients (75% had dominant visceral disease), these preliminary results suggest that super-FEC has a powerful activity in poor-prognosis metastatic breast cancer with an acceptable degree of toxicity.
