IMPORTANCE: The Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) recommends 2 alternative treatments for patients receiving treatment at steps 3 to 5: single inhaler combination inhaled corticosteroid-formoterol as both maintenance and reliever (SMART) or inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist as maintenance plus short-acting beta2-agonist as reliever. OBJECTIVE: To assess whether switching to SMART is associated with longer time to first severe asthma exacerbation compared with a step up or continuation of GINA treatment step with maintenance inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist plus short-acting beta2-agonist reliever among patients with poorly controlled asthma. DATA SOURCES: For this systematic review and meta-analysis, the literature, internal study databases at AstraZeneca and the Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, and references from a previous systematic review and meta-analysis on SMART were searched to identify randomized clinical trials published from January 1990 to February 2018, that compared budesonide-formoterol by SMART with maintenance inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist plus short-acting beta2-agonist reliever. STUDY SELECTION: Trials of at least 24 weeks' duration were included if they reported baseline data on GINA treatment step, asthma control status, and efficacy measures of severe exacerbations. Included patients were adults and adolescents with asthma and baseline Asthma Control Questionnaire 5-item version scores of 1.5 or higher. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Patient-level data were identified by independent extraction, and analyses were performed using a fixed-effect model. Data analysis was performed from August 2018 to November 2021. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was time to first severe asthma exacerbation associated with each treatment, analyzed by Cox proportional hazards regression. RESULTS: Overall, 4863 patients were included (3034 [62.4%] female; mean [SD] age, 39.8 [16.3] years). Switching patients with uncontrolled asthma at GINA step 3 (n = 1950) to SMART at either step 3 or 4 was associated with a prolonged time to first severe asthma exacerbation, with a 29% reduced risk compared with stepping up to step 4 inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist maintenance plus short-acting beta2-agonist reliever (hazard ratio, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.52-0.97). For patients with uncontrolled asthma at step 3 and step 4 (n = 2913), switching to SMART was associated with a prolonged time to first severe asthma exacerbation and a 30% reduced risk compared with remaining at the same treatment step (hazard ratio, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.58-0.85). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this systematic review and meta-analysis, for patients with poorly controlled asthma, SMART was associated with longer time to first severe asthma exacerbation compared with a step up or continuation of GINA step with maintenance inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist plus short-acting beta2-agonist reliever. These findings suggest that if an adult or adolescent receiving treatment at GINA step 3 or 4 has poorly controlled asthma, it is preferable to switch to the SMART regimen rather than to step up or continue the GINA treatment step with maintenance inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist plus short-acting beta2-agonist reliever therapy.
In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who experience further exacerbations or symptoms, despite being prescribed dual long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA) or inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/LABA therapies, triple ICS/LAMA/LABA therapy is recommended. A previous network meta-analysis showed comparable efficacy of the ICS/LAMA/LABA, budesonide/glycopyrronium bromide/formoterol fumarate (BUD/GLY/FOR) 320/18/9.6 microg, to other fixed-dose and open combination triple therapies at 24 weeks in COPD. Subsequently, the ETHOS study was published, including data for 8509 patients, assessing the efficacy and safety of BUD/GLY/FOR over 52 weeks. This network meta-analysis (NMA) was conducted to compare the relative efficacy, safety, and tolerability of BUD/GLY/FOR 320/18/9.6 microg with other fixed-dose and open combination triple therapies in COPD over 52 weeks, including data from ETHOS. A systematic literature review was conducted to identify >/= 10-week randomized controlled trials, including >/= 1 fixed-dose or open combination triple-therapy arm, in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD. The methodologic quality and risk of bias of included studies were assessed. Study results were combined using a three-level hierarchical Bayesian NMA model to assess efficacy and safety outcomes at or over 24 and 52 weeks. Meta-regression and sensitivity analyses were used to assess heterogeneity across studies. Nineteen studies (n = 37,741 patients) met the inclusion criteria of the review; 15 contributed to the base case network. LAMA/LABA dual combinations were combined as a single treatment group to create a connected network. Across all outcomes for exacerbations, lung function, symptoms, health-related quality of life, safety, and tolerability, the efficacy and safety of BUD/GLY/FOR were comparable to those of other triple ICS/LAMA/LABA fixed-dose (fluticasone furoate/umeclidinium/vilanterol and beclomethasone dipropionate/glycopyrronium bromide/formoterol fumarate) and open combinations at or over 24 and 52 weeks. Sensitivity analyses and meta-regression results for exacerbation outcomes were broadly in line with the base case NMA. In this NMA, BUD/GLY/FOR 320/18/9.6 mug showed comparable efficacy versus other ICS/LAMA/LABA fixed-dose or open combination therapies in terms of reducing exacerbation rates and improving lung function, symptoms and health-related quality of life in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD, in line with previously published meta-analysis results of triple combinations in COPD. The safety and tolerability profile of BUD/GLY/FOR was also found to be comparable to other triple combination therapies.
BACKGROUND: Single inhaler triple therapies providing an inhaled corticosteroid, a long-acting muscarinic antagonist, and a long-acting beta(2)-agonist (ICS/LAMA/LABAs) are an emerging treatment option for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Nevertheless, questions remain regarding the optimal patient population for triple therapy as well as the benefit:risk ratio of ICS treatment. METHODS: ETHOS is an ongoing, randomized, double-blind, multicenter, parallel-group, 52-week study in symptomatic patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD and a history of exacerbation(s) in the previous year. Two doses of single inhaler triple therapy with budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (BGF MDI 320/18/9.6 mug and 160/18/9.6 mug) will be compared to glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF) MDI 18/9.6 mug and budesonide/formoterol fumarate (BFF) MDI 320/9.6 mug, all formulated using co-suspension delivery technology. Outcomes include the rate of moderate/severe (primary endpoint) and severe COPD exacerbations, symptoms, quality of life, and all-cause mortality. Sub-studies will assess lung function and cardiovascular safety. STUDY POPULATION: From June 2015-July 2018, 16,044 patients were screened and 8572 were randomized. Preliminary baseline demographics show that 55.9% of patients had experienced >/=2 moderate/severe exacerbations in the previous year, 79.1% were receiving an ICS-containing treatment at study entry, and 59.9% had blood eosinophil counts >/=150 cells/mm(3). CONCLUSIONS: ETHOS will provide data on exacerbations, patient-reported outcomes, mortality, and safety in 8572 patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD receiving triple and dual fixed-dose combinations. For the first time, ICS/LAMA/LABA triple therapy with two different doses of ICS will be compared to dual ICS/LABA and LAMA/LABA therapies. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02465567.
BACKGROUND: In patients with mild asthma, as-needed use of an inhaled glucocorticoid plus a fast-acting beta(2)-agonist may be an alternative to conventional treatment strategies. METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, double-blind trial involving patients 12 years of age or older with mild asthma. Patients were randomly assigned to one of three regimens: twice-daily placebo plus terbutaline (0.5 mg) used as needed (terbutaline group), twice-daily placebo plus budesonide-formoterol (200 mug of budesonide and 6 mug of formoterol) used as needed (budesonide-formoterol group), or twice-daily budesonide (200 mug) plus terbutaline used as needed (budesonide maintenance group). The primary objective was to investigate the superiority of as-needed budesonide-formoterol to as-needed terbutaline with regard to electronically recorded weeks with well-controlled asthma. RESULTS: A total of 3849 patients underwent randomization, and 3836 (1277 in the terbutaline group, 1277 in the budesonide-formoterol group, and 1282 in the budesonide maintenance group) were included in the full analysis and safety data sets. With respect to the mean percentage of weeks with well-controlled asthma per patient, budesonide-formoterol was superior to terbutaline (34.4% vs. 31.1% of weeks; odds ratio, 1.14; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.00 to 1.30; P=0.046) but inferior to budesonide maintenance therapy (34.4% and 44.4%, respectively; odds ratio, 0.64; 95% CI, 0.57 to 0.73). The annual rate of severe exacerbations was 0.20 with terbutaline, 0.07 with budesonide-formoterol, and 0.09 with budesonide maintenance therapy; the rate ratio was 0.36 (95% CI, 0.27 to 0.49) for budesonide-formoterol versus terbutaline and 0.83 (95% CI, 0.59 to 1.16) for budesonide-formoterol versus budesonide maintenance therapy. The rate of adherence in the budesonide maintenance group was 78.9%. The median metered daily dose of inhaled glucocorticoid in the budesonide-formoterol group (57 mug) was 17% of the dose in the budesonide maintenance group (340 mug). CONCLUSIONS: In patients with mild asthma, as-needed budesonide-formoterol provided superior asthma-symptom control to as-needed terbutaline, assessed according to electronically recorded weeks with well-controlled asthma, but was inferior to budesonide maintenance therapy. Exacerbation rates with the two budesonide-containing regimens were similar and were lower than the rate with terbutaline. Budesonide-formoterol used as needed resulted in substantially lower glucocorticoid exposure than budesonide maintenance therapy. (Funded by AstraZeneca; SYGMA 1 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02149199 .).
INTRODUCTION: The study aims to compare the real-world effectiveness and economy of the budesonide/formoterol reliever and maintenance therapy (SMART) with fixed-dose inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)/long-acting b-agonist (LABA) or ICS alone plus as-needed, short-acting beta2 agonists (SABA) in pediatric patients. METHODS: The outpatient data warehouse of a hospital in China was used. A total of 103 patients under 18 years old in the SMART group and 63 patients in the control group were included from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2021. The effectiveness was assessed using asthma attacks and lung function at baseline, 6 months and 12 months follow-up. Cost-effectiveness analysis was performed with a three-state Markov model from the healthcare system perspective. One-way sensitivity analyses and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were performed to check the robustness of the results. RESULTS: The SMART regimen was more effective than other strategies in reducing the risk of mild and severe attacks in the real-life management of childhood asthma. Patients in both groups showed significant improvement in lung function at 6 and 12 months in contrast to baseline. Compared with other strategies, the forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1) ) level in the SMART group was markedly improved at 6 months. The total cost of outpatient service using the SMART regimen was lower than that of other strategies, while the drug costs were similar in different groups. Incremental cost-effectiveness analysis results showed that using the SMART regimen reduced the total cost by approximately CNY 10,516.11 per year with a 0.12 quality-adjusted life year (QALYs) increase. Sensitive analyses supported that the SMART regimen was the dominant choice at the willingness-to-pay threshold of CNY 85,698, per capita GDP in China. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our findings indicate that the real-world effectiveness and economy of the SMART regimen are superior to the traditional strategies in pediatric asthma patients.
Polymorph screening of formoterol fumarate was performed in 12 solvents, followed by evaluations of thermodynamic stability. Three anhydrates, a dihydrate, a diethanolate, a diisopropanolate, and a dibensylalcoholate were found. The crystal structure of three solvated modifications and of the most stable anhydrate was investigated. This indicated that solvation is needed to get a stable and well packed crystal structure. Thermodynamic testing suggests that five crystal modifications are thermodynamically stable, at different conditions, since they are all reversibly related to each other.
BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids have been used in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but the potential benefits of their use in triple therapy are not well known. We aimed to compare the efficacy of a triple therapy with corresponding dual therapies in symptomatic patients with moderate to very severe COPD, without a requirement for a history of exacerbations. METHODS: In this double-blind, parallel-group, multicentre phase 3 randomised controlled trial, we recruited patients from hospitals and care centres in Canada, China, Japan, and the USA. Eligible patients were 40-80 years of age, were current or former smokers (with a smoking history of >/=10 pack-years), had an established clinical history of COPD, and were symptomatic for COPD, despite receiving two or more inhaled maintenance therapies for at least 6 weeks before screening. We randomly assigned patients (2:2:1:1) using an interactive web response system to receive budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered-dose inhaler 320/18/9.6 mug (BGF MDI), glycopyrrolate/ formoterol fumarate metered-dose inhaler 18/9.6 mug (GFF MDI), budesonide/formoterol fumarate metered-dose inhaler 320/9.6 mug (BFF MDI), or open-label budesonide/formoterol fumarate dry-powder inhaler 400/12 mug (BUD/ FORM DPI). Primary endpoints for the Europe/Canada statistical analysis approach were FEV(1) area under the curve from 0-4 h (AUC(0-4)) for BGF MDI versus BFF MDI and BGF MDI versus BUD/FORM DPI over 24 weeks; and change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough FEV(1) for BGF MDI versus GFF MDI and non-inferiority of BFF MDI versus BUD/FORM DPI (margin of -50 mL from lower bound of 95% CI) over 24 weeks. Comparisons with BUD/FORM DPI were made for the Europe/Canada statistical analysis approach only. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02497001. FINDINGS: Between Aug 20, 2015, and Jan 5, 2018, 3047 patients were screened from 215 sites, and 1902 were randomly assigned to receive BGF MDI (n=640), GFF MDI (n=627), BFF MDI (n=316), or BUD/FORM DPI (n=319). Over 24 weeks, BGF MDI significantly improved FEV(1) AUC(0-4) versus BFF MDI (least squares mean difference 104 mL, 95% CI 77 to 131; p<0.0001) and BUD/FORM DPI (91 mL, 64 to 117; p<0.0001). BGF MDI also significantly improved pre-dose trough FEV(1) versus GFF MDI (22 mL, 4 to 39; p=0.0139) and was non-inferior to BUD/FORM DPI (-10 mL, -36 to 16; p=0.4390). At week 24, patients in the BGF MDI group had a significantly improved FEV(1) AUC(0-4) compared with patients receiving BFF MDI (116 mL, 95% CI 80 to 152; p<0.0001); there was a non-significant improvement in the change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough FEV(1) at week 24 versus GFF MDI (13 mL, -9 to 36 mL; p=0.2375). The most common treatment-emergent adverse events were nasopharyngitis (n=49 [8%] in the BGF MDI group; n=41 [7%] in the GFF MDI group; n=26 [8%] in the BFF MDI group; and n=30 [9%] in the BUD/FORM DPI group) and upper respiratory tract infection (n=65 [10%]; n=38 [6%]; n=18 [6%]; and n=22 [7%]). Pneumonia incidence was low (<2%) and similar across treatments. There were two treatment-related deaths, both in the GFF MDI group. INTERPRETATION: BGF MDI was efficacious, well tolerated, and could be a more appropriate treatment than the corresponding dual therapies for symptomatic patients with moderate to very severe COPD, irrespective of exacerbation history. FUNDING: Pearl-a member of the AstraZeneca Group.
Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol (BREZTRI AEROSPHERE; TRIXEO AEROSPHERE) is an inhaled fixed-dose combination of the inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) budesonide, the long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) glycopyrronium bromide and the long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA) formoterol fumarate approved for the maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is delivered via a pressurized metered-dose Aerosphere inhaler and is formulated using co-suspension delivery technology. In two pivotal phase III trials of 24-52 weeks' duration, budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol reduced the rates of moderate/severe COPD exacerbations and improved lung function to a greater extent than budesonide/formoterol and/or glycopyrronium/formoterol. Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol also demonstrated beneficial effects on dyspnoea, rescue medication requirements and health-related quality of life (HR-QOL), and reduced the risk of all-cause mortality. Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol was generally well tolerated, with the tolerability profile being generally similar to that of the individual components. Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol provides a useful and convenient option for the maintenance treatment of COPD, including for patients whose disease is inadequately controlled with dual ICS/LABA or LAMA/LABA therapy.
BACKGROUND: Patients with mild asthma often rely on inhaled short-acting beta(2)-agonists for symptom relief and have poor adherence to maintenance therapy. Another approach might be for patients to receive a fast-acting reliever plus an inhaled glucocorticoid component on an as-needed basis to address symptoms and exacerbation risk. METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, double-blind, multicenter trial involving patients 12 years of age or older who had mild asthma and were eligible for treatment with regular inhaled glucocorticoids. Patients were randomly assigned to receive twice-daily placebo plus budesonide-formoterol (200 mug of budesonide and 6 mug of formoterol) used as needed or budesonide maintenance therapy with twice-daily budesonide (200 mug) plus terbutaline (0.5 mg) used as needed. The primary analysis compared budesonide-formoterol used as needed with budesonide maintenance therapy with regard to the annualized rate of severe exacerbations, with a prespecified noninferiority limit of 1.2. Symptoms were assessed according to scores on the Asthma Control Questionnaire-5 (ACQ-5) on a scale from 0 (no impairment) to 6 (maximum impairment). RESULTS: A total of 4215 patients underwent randomization, and 4176 (2089 in the budesonide-formoterol group and 2087 in the budesonide maintenance group) were included in the full analysis set. Budesonide-formoterol used as needed was noninferior to budesonide maintenance therapy for severe exacerbations; the annualized rate of severe exacerbations was 0.11 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.10 to 0.13) and 0.12 (95% CI, 0.10 to 0.14), respectively (rate ratio, 0.97; upper one-sided 95% confidence limit, 1.16). The median daily metered dose of inhaled glucocorticoid was lower in the budesonide-formoterol group (66 mug) than in the budesonide maintenance group (267 mug). The time to the first exacerbation was similar in the two groups (hazard ratio, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.78 to 1.17). The change in ACQ-5 score showed a difference of 0.11 units (95% CI, 0.07 to 0.15) in favor of budesonide maintenance therapy. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with mild asthma, budesonide-formoterol used as needed was noninferior to twice-daily budesonide with respect to the rate of severe asthma exacerbations during 52 weeks of treatment but was inferior in controlling symptoms. Patients in the budesonide-formoterol group had approximately one quarter of the inhaled glucocorticoid exposure of those in the budesonide maintenance group. (Funded by AstraZeneca; SYGMA 2 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02224157 .).
Aim: Quality, real-world comparative effectiveness (CE) studies of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease therapy efficacy are scarce. We identified and evaluated peer-reviewed CE and appropriate-use evaluations of budesonide/formoterol combination (BFC) maintenance therapy. Materials & methods: Analyses were limited to retrospective, real-world utilization studies of BFC delivered by pressurized metered-dose inhalers. Results: In a CE study of BFC versus fluticasone/salmeterol combinations (FSC) in asthma, BFC users had fewer total exacerbations. In appropriate-use studies of asthma treatment, BFC patients were consistently more likely to meet treatment escalation recommendations. BFC comparisons with FSC or tiotropium for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease found differences in exacerbation rates and rescue inhaler use. Conclusion: We found available, good quality BFC CE and appropriate-use articles; however, all had limitations.
BACKGROUND: In double-blind, placebo-controlled trials, budesonide-formoterol used on an as-needed basis resulted in a lower risk of severe exacerbation of asthma than as-needed use of a short-acting beta(2)-agonist (SABA); the risk was similar to that of budesonide maintenance therapy plus as-needed SABA. The availability of data from clinical trials designed to better reflect clinical practice would be beneficial. METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, randomized, open-label, parallel-group, controlled trial involving adults with mild asthma. Patients were randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups: albuterol (100 mug, two inhalations from a pressurized metered-dose inhaler as needed for asthma symptoms) (albuterol group); budesonide (200 mug, one inhalation through a Turbuhaler twice daily) plus as-needed albuterol (budesonide maintenance group); or budesonide-formoterol (200 mug of budesonide and 6 mug of formoterol, one inhalation through a Turbuhaler as needed) (budesonide-formoterol group). Electronic monitoring of inhalers was used to measure medication use. The primary outcome was the annualized rate of asthma exacerbations. RESULTS: The analysis included 668 of 675 patients who underwent randomization. The annualized exacerbation rate in the budesonide-formoterol group was lower than that in the albuterol group (absolute rate, 0.195 vs. 0.400; relative rate, 0.49; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.33 to 0.72; P<0.001) and did not differ significantly from the rate in the budesonide maintenance group (absolute rate, 0.195 in the budesonide-formoterol group vs. 0.175 in the budesonide maintenance group; relative rate, 1.12; 95% CI, 0.70 to 1.79; P = 0.65). The number of severe exacerbations was lower in the budesonide-formoterol group than in both the albuterol group (9 vs. 23; relative risk, 0.40; 95% CI, 0.18 to 0.86) and the budesonide maintenance group (9 vs. 21; relative risk, 0.44; 95% CI, 0.20 to 0.96). The mean (+/-SD) dose of inhaled budesonide was 107+/-109 mug per day in the budesonide-formoterol group and 222+/-113 mug per day in the budesonide maintenance group. The incidence and type of adverse events reported were consistent with those in previous trials and with reports in clinical use. CONCLUSIONS: In an open-label trial involving adults with mild asthma, budesonide-formoterol used as needed was superior to albuterol used as needed for the prevention of asthma exacerbations. (Funded by AstraZeneca and the Health Research Council of New Zealand; Novel START Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry number, ACTRN12615000999538.).
Rationale: In the phase III, 52-week ETHOS (Efficacy and Safety of Triple Therapy in Obstructive Lung Disease) trial in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (NCT02465567), triple therapy with budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (BGF) significantly reduced all-cause mortality compared with glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF). However, 384 of 8,509 patients were missing vital status at Week 52 in the original analyses.Objectives: To assess the robustness of the ETHOS mortality findings after additional data retrieval for patients missing Week 52 vital status in the original analyses.Methods: Patients with moderate to very severe COPD and prior history of exacerbation received twice-daily dosing with 320/18/9.6 mug of BGF (BGF 320), 160/18/9.6 mug of BGF (BGF 160), 18/9.6 mug of GFF, or 320/9.6 mug of budesonide/formoterol fumarate (BFF) (all delivered via a single metered-dose Aerosphere inhaler). Time to death (all-cause) was a prespecified secondary endpoint.Measurements and Main Results: In the final retrieved dataset, which included Week 52 vital status for 99.6% of the intent-to-treat population, risk of death with BGF 320 was significantly lower than GFF (hazard ratio, 0.51; 95% confidence interval, 0.33-0.80; unadjusted P = 0.0035). There were no significant differences in mortality when comparing BGF 320 with BFF (hazard ratio, 0.72; 95% confidence interval, 0.44-1.16; P = 0.1721), nor were significant differences observed when comparing BGF 160 against either dual comparator. Results were similar when the first 30, 60, or 90 days of treatment were excluded from the analysis. Deaths from cardiovascular causes occurred in 0.5%, 0.8%, 1.4%, and 0.5% of patients in the BGF 320, BGF 160, GFF, and BFF groups, respectively.Conclusions: Using final retrieved vital status data, triple therapy with BGF 320 reduced the risk of death compared with GFF, but was not shown to significantly reduce the risk of death compared with BFF, in patients with COPD. Triple therapy containing a lower dose of inhaled corticosteroid (BGF 160) was not shown to significantly reduce the risk of death compared with the dual therapy comparators.
The Global Initiative for Asthma recommends that low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/formoterol be preferred to short-acting beta(2)-agonists as reliever therapy in adolescents and adults with asthma, across the range of asthma severity. This recommendation represents the most fundamental change in asthma management for many decades. In this commentary, we review the rationale for combination ICS/formoterol therapy, the evidence on which this recommendation has been made, the limitations in the evidence, the practical issues relevant to the implementation of ICS/formoterol reliever-based regimens in clinical practice, and the emerging evidence for the efficacy and safety of combination ICS/salbutamol reliever therapy regimens.
OBJECTIVE: Airway inflammation in asthma involves not only the central airways but extends to peripheral airways. Lung deposition may be key for an appropriate treatment of asthma. We compared the clinical effects of extrafine hydrofluoroalkane (HFA)-beclomethasone-formoterol (BDP-F) versus equipotent doses of nonextrafine combination of an inhaled corticosteroid and a long acting beta2-agonist (ICS-LABA) in asthma. METHODS: We identified eligible studies by a comprehensive literature search of PubMed, EMBASE and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL). Data analysis was performed with the Review Manager 5.3.5 software (Cochrane IMS, 2014). RESULTS: A total of 2326 patients with asthma from ten published randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were enrolled for analysis. Change from baseline in morning pre-dose peak expiratory flow (PEF), evening pre-dose PEF and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) were detected no significant differences between extrafine HFA-BDP-F and nonextrafine ICS-LABAs (p = 0.23, p = 0.99 and p = 0.23, respectively). Extrafine HFA-BDP-F did not show any greater benefit in forced expiratory flow between 25% and 75% of forced vital capacity (FEF25-75%), the parameter concerning peripheral airways (MD 0.03L/s, p = 0.65; n = 877). There were no substantial differences between interventions in fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) levels or in its alveolar fraction. The overall analysis showed no significant benefit of extrafine HFA-BDP-F over nonextrafine ICS-LABA in improving Asthma Control Test (ACT) score (p = 0.30) or decreasing the number of puffs of rescue medication use (p = 0.16). Extrafine HFA-BDP-F did not lead to less exacerbations than nonextrafine ICS-LABA (RR 0.61, 95% CI: 0.31 to 1.20; I2 = 0; p = 0.15). CONCLUSION: Enrolled RCTs of extrafine HFA-BDP-F have demonstrated no significant advantages over the equivalent combination of nonextrafine ICS-LABA in improving pulmonary function concerning central airways or peripheral airways, improving asthma symptom control or reducing exacerbation rate.
BACKGROUND: The single-inhaler triple combination of beclometasone dipropionate, formoterol fumarate, and glycopyrronium (BDP/FF/G) is available for maintenance therapy of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Cardinal features of COPD are lung hyperinflation and reduced exercise capacity. TRIFORCE aimed to evaluate the effect of BDP/FF/G on lung hyperinflation and exercise capacity in patients with COPD. METHODS: This double-blind, randomised, active- and placebo-controlled, crossover study recruited adults with COPD aged >/= 40 years, who were hyperinflated and symptomatic, and were receiving mono- or dual inhaled maintenance COPD therapy. In the three treatment periods, patients were randomised to receive BDP/FF/G, BDP/FF, or placebo, each for 3 weeks, with a 7-10-day washout between treatment periods. Assessments included slow inspiratory spirometry (for resting inspiratory capacity [IC]) and constant work-rate cycle ergometry (for dynamic IC and exercise endurance time). The primary objective was to compare BDP/FF/G and BDP/FF vs. placebo for resting IC at Week 3. Key secondary objectives were to compare BDP/FF/G and BDP/FF vs. placebo for dynamic IC and exercise endurance time during constant work rate cycle ergometry at Week 3. RESULTS: Of 106 patients randomised, 95 completed the study. Resting IC adjusted mean differences vs. placebo were 315 and 223 mL for BDP/FF/G and BDP/FF, respectively (p < 0.001 for both). Adjusted mean differences vs. placebo for the key secondary endpoints were: 245 mL for dynamic IC (p < 0.001) and 69.2 s for exercise endurance time (nominal p < 0.001) with BDP/FF/G, and 96 mL (p = 0.053) and 70.1 s (nominal p < 0.001) with BDP/FF. Differences between BDP/FF/G and BDP/FF for resting and dynamic IC were 92 and 149 mL (p < 0.01 for both). All three treatments were generally well tolerated, with 27.3%, 25.3% and 19.0% of patients reporting adverse events with BDP/FF/G, BDP/FF and placebo, respectively, all mild or moderate. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with COPD, BDP/FF/G provided significant and clinically relevant improvements vs. placebo and BDP/FF in static and dynamic hyperinflation, with an improvement vs. placebo in exercise endurance. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT05097014), registered 27th October 2021.
Revefenacin inhalation solution, a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), and formoterol fumarate inhalation solution, a long-acting ss-agonist (LABA), are indicated for the maintenance treatment of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. LAMA or LABA monotherapy, or a combination of LAMA/LABA for more severe symptoms, is recommended as first-line treatment in this patient population. We conducted a study to test the physicochemical properties of revefenacin and formoterol fumarate inhalation solution admixture in support of a clinical trial evaluating the safety of these nebulized bronchodilators, administered in sequence, and as a combination, in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (NCT03573817). The admixture of these two products was evaluated for changes in appearance, pH, osmolality, active drug content, purity, and impurity/degradant levels at 25 degrees C for up to 25 hours. No substantial changes were observed in the physicochemical properties of revefenacin inhalation solution and formoterol fumarate inhalation solution admixture, demonstrating the physicochemical compatibility and stability of the two drugs in solution for up to 25 hours at room temperature.
BACKGROUND: Asthma is characterised by chronic inflammation of the airways and recurrent exacerbations with wheezing, chest tightness, and cough. Treatment with inhaled steroids and bronchodilators can result in good control of symptoms, prevention of further morbidity, and improved quality of life. However, an increase in serious adverse events with the use of both regular formoterol and regular salmeterol (long-acting beta(2)-agonists) compared with placebo for chronic asthma has been demonstrated in previous Cochrane Reviews. This increase was statistically significant in trials that did not randomise participants to an inhaled corticosteroid, but not when formoterol or salmeterol was combined with an inhaled corticosteroid. The confidence intervals were found to be too wide to ensure that the addition of an inhaled corticosteroid renders regular long-acting beta(2)-agonists completely safe; few participants and insufficient serious adverse events in these trials precluded a definitive decision about the safety of combination treatments. OBJECTIVES: To assess risks of mortality and non-fatal serious adverse events in trials that have randomised patients with chronic asthma to regular formoterol and an inhaled corticosteroid versus regular salmeterol and an inhaled corticosteroid. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Register of Trials, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, and two trial registries to identify reports of randomised trials for inclusion. We checked manufacturers' websites and clinical trial registers for unpublished trial data, as well as Food and Drug Administration (FDA) submissions in relation to formoterol and salmeterol. The date of the most recent search was  24 February 2021. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included controlled clinical trials with a parallel design, recruiting patients of any age and severity of asthma, if they randomised patients to treatment with regular formoterol versus regular salmeterol (each with a randomised inhaled corticosteroid) and were of at least 12 weeks' duration. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently selected trials for inclusion in the review, extracted outcome data from published papers and trial registries, and applied GRADE rating for the results. We sought unpublished data on mortality and serious adverse events from study sponsors and authors. The primary outcomes were all cause mortality and non-fatal serious adverse events. We chose not to calculate an average result from all the formulations of formoterol and inhaled steroid, as the doses and delivery devices are too diverse to assume a single class effect. MAIN RESULTS: Twenty-one studies in 11,572 adults and adolescents and two studies in 723 children met the eligibility criteria of the review. No data were available for two studies; therefore these were not included in the analysis. Among adult and adolescent studies, seven compared formoterol and budesonide to salmeterol and fluticasone (N = 7764), six compared formoterol and beclomethasone to salmeterol and fluticasone (N = 1923), two compared formoterol and mometasone to salmeterol and fluticasone (N = 1126), two compared formoterol and fluticasone to salmeterol and fluticasone (N = 790), and one compared formoterol and budesonide to salmeterol and budesonide (N = 229). In total, five deaths were reported among adults, none of which was thought to be related to asthma. The certainty of evidence for all-cause mortality was low, as there were not enough deaths to permit any precise conclusions regarding the risk of mortality on combination formoterol versus combination salmeterol. In all, 201 adults reported non-fatal serious adverse events. In studies comparing formoterol and budesonide to salmeterol and fluticasone, there were 77 in the formoterol arm and 68 in the salmeterol arm (Peto odds ratio (OR) 1.14, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.82 to 1.59; 5935 participants, 7 studies; moderate-certainty evidence). In the formoterol and beclomethasone studies, there were 12 adults in the formoterol arm and 13 in the salmeterol arm with events (Peto OR 0.94, 95% CI 0.43 to 2.08; 1941 participants, 6 studies; moderate-certainty evidence). In the formoterol and mometasone studies, there were 18 in the formoterol arm and 11 in the salmeterol arm (Peto OR 1.02, 95% CI 0.47 to 2.20; 1126 participants, 2 studies; moderate-certainty evidence). One adult in the formoterol and fluticasone studies in the salmeterol arm experienced an event (Peto OR 0.05, 95% CI 0.00 to 3.10; 293 participants, 2 studies; low-certainty evidence). Another adult in the formoterol and budesonide compared to salmeterol and budesonide study in the formoterol arm had an event (Peto OR 7.45, 95% CI 0.15 to 375.68; 229 participants, 1 study; low-certainty evidence). Only 46 adults were reported to have experienced asthma-related serious adverse events. The certainty of the evidence was low to very low due to the small number of events and the absence of independent assessment of causation. The two studies in children compared formoterol and fluticasone to salmeterol and fluticasone. No deaths and no asthma-related serious adverse events were reported in these studies. Four all-cause serious adverse events were reported: three in the formoterol arm, and one in the salmeterol arm (Peto OR 2.72, 95% CI 0.38 to 19.46; 548 participants, 2 studies; low-certainty evidence). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Overall, for both adults and children, evidence is insufficient to show whether regular formoterol in combination with budesonide, beclomethasone, fluticasone, or mometasone has a different safety profile from salmeterol in combination with fluticasone or budesonide. Five deaths of any cause were reported across all studies and no deaths from asthma; this information is insufficient to permit any firm conclusions about the relative risks of mortality on combination formoterol in comparison to combination salmeterol inhalers. Evidence on all-cause non-fatal serious adverse events indicates that there is probably little to no difference between formoterol/budesonide and salmeterol/fluticasone inhalers. However events for the other formoterol combination inhalers were too few to allow conclusions. Only 46 non-fatal serious adverse events were thought to be asthma related; this small number in addition to the absence of independent outcome assessment means that we have very low confidence for this outcome. We found no evidence of safety issues that would affect the choice between salmeterol and formoterol combination inhalers used for regular maintenance therapy by adults and children with asthma.
BACKGROUND: Recent asthma guidelines, such as the Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA), recommend in adult patients as-needed inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)-formoterol as an alternative to maintenance ICS in mild to moderate persistent asthma. The introduction of these recommendations concerns whether using as-needed budesonide-formoterol would be more cost-effective than to maintenance ICS. This study aimed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of as-needed combination low-dose budesonide-formoterol compared to short-acting beta2-agonist (SABA) reliever therapy in patients with mild asthma. METHODS: A probabilistic Markov model was created to estimate the cost and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) of patients with mild asthma in Colombia. Total costs and QALYs of low-dose budesonide-formoterol compared to short-acting beta2-agonist (SABA) were calculated over a lifetime horizon. Multiple sensitivity analyses were conducted. Cost-effectiveness was evaluated at a willingness-to-pay value of $19,000. RESULTS: The model suggests a potential gain of 0.37 QALYs and per patient per year on as-needed ICS-formoterol and a reduction in the discounted cost per person-year, of as-needed ICS-formoterol to maintenance ICS, of US$40. This position of dominance of as-needed ICS-formoterol negates the need to calculate an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio. In the deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity analysis, our base-case results were robust to variations in all assumptions and parameters. CONCLUSION: Low-dose budesonide-formoterol as a reliever was cost-effective when added to usual care in patients with mild asthma. Our study provides evidence that should be used by decision-makers to improve clinical practice guidelines and should be replicated to validate their results in other middle-income countries.
BACKGROUND: Sixty-five percent of people with severe asthma and a fractional exhaled nitric oxide (Feno) greater than or equal to 45 parts per billion (ppb) are nonadherent to inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs). Digital devices recording both time of use and inhaler technique identify nonadherence and ICS responsiveness but are not widely available. As the NEXThaler dose counter activates only at an inspiratory flow rate of 35 L/min, this may provide an alternative to identifying ICS responsiveness. OBJECTIVE: To assess ICS adherence and responsiveness in severe asthma using beclometasone/formoterol (200/6 mug) NEXThaler (BFN) dose-counting. METHODS: Patients with severe asthma with a Feno greater than or equal to 45 ppb were invited to use BFN in place of their usual ICS/long-acting beta(2)-agonist. Feno, 6-item Asthma Control Questionnaire score, lung function, and blood eosinophil count were monitored for 3 months. A log(10)DeltaFeno of greater than or equal to 0.24 was used to define Feno suppression as the primary marker of ICS responsiveness at day 28. RESULTS: Twenty-seven of 48 (56%) patients demonstrated significant Feno suppression at month 1 (median pre-114, post-48 ppb, P < .001). A small but significant reduction occurred in Feno nonsuppressors. The 6-item Asthma Control Questionnaire score fell a median 1.2 units in Feno suppressors (P < .001) and 0.5 units in nonsuppressors (P = .025). These effects were sustained until month 3 in Feno suppressors, with a significant improvement in FEV(1) and blood eosinophils. Sixty-seven percent (18 of 27) of those with baseline ICS/long-acting beta(2)-agonist prescription refills of 80% or more were Feno suppressors, suggesting prior nonadherence despite adequate prescription collection. Seventy-nine percent of Feno suppressors did not require biologics within mean 11.4 months from initial dose counting. CONCLUSIONS: BFN dose-counting identifies ICS responsiveness in severe asthma with the implication that these patients may not need to progress to biological therapies.
INTRODUCTION: Pressurised metered dose inhalers (pMDIs) are effective drug delivery devices prescribed in obstructive airway diseases due to their convenience, portability, ease of enabling multiple doses in a single formulation, and storage in any orientation. For the management of asthma, the fixed-dose combination of a long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA) and an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) has been recommended by Global Initiative for Asthma guideline as a preferred treatment option for patients who are uncontrolled with only ICS doses. One of the available LABA/ICS combinations is the formoterol/budesonide (FB). AREAS COVERED: This article systematically reviews the efficacy and safety of the FB pMDI compared with the FB dry powder inhaler (DPI), individual mono-components (formoterol and budesonide) or salmeterol/fluticasone (SF) combination in the treatment of asthma among paediatric and adult patients. PubMed was searched with the string: ''((Budesonide) AND Formoterol) AND ((((pMDI) OR MDI) OR Pressurised Metered-dose inhaler) OR Metered-dose inhaler)'', in ALL fields. Screening of all the articles was done till February 2020. We have included 24 articles from the total of 142 hits received. CONCLUSIONS: The FB pMDI is efficacious for the long-term management of asthma in patients 6 years of age and above. It has been shown to improve lung function and asthma control, and to reduce daytime and night-time symptoms, the number of rescue medication doses and asthma exacerbations. It also showed rapid onset of bronchodilatory effect with a dose-response relationship that allows patients to utilise it as a Single Maintenance And Reliever Therapy (SMART) regimen.
