BACKGROUND: Benzodiazepine-refractory, or established, status epilepticus is thought to be of similar pathophysiology in children and adults, but differences in underlying aetiology and pharmacodynamics might differentially affect response to therapy. In the Established Status Epilepticus Treatment Trial (ESETT) we compared the efficacy and safety of levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, and valproate in established status epilepticus, and here we describe our results after extending enrolment in children to compare outcomes in three age groups. METHODS: In this multicentre, double-blind, response-adaptive, randomised controlled trial, we recruited patients from 58 hospital emergency departments across the USA. Patients were eligible for inclusion if they were aged 2 years or older, had been treated for a generalised convulsive seizure of longer than 5 min duration with adequate doses of benzodiazepines, and continued to have persistent or recurrent convulsions in the emergency department for at least 5 min and no more than 30 min after the last dose of benzodiazepine. Patients were randomly assigned in a response-adaptive manner, using Bayesian methods and stratified by age group (<18 years, 18-65 years, and >65 years), to levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, or valproate. All patients, investigators, study staff, and pharmacists were masked to treatment allocation. The primary outcome was absence of clinically apparent seizures with improved consciousness and without additional antiseizure medication at 1 h from start of drug infusion. The primary safety outcome was life-threatening hypotension or cardiac arrhythmia. The efficacy and safety outcomes were analysed by intention to treat. This study is registered in ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01960075. FINDINGS: Between Nov 3, 2015, and Dec 29, 2018, we enrolled 478 patients and 462 unique patients were included: 225 children (aged <18 years), 186 adults (18-65 years), and 51 older adults (>65 years). 175 (38%) patients were randomly assigned to levetiracetam, 142 (31%) to fosphenyltoin, and 145 (31%) were to valproate. Baseline characteristics were balanced across treatments within age groups. The primary efficacy outcome was met in those treated with levetiracetam for 52% (95% credible interval 41-62) of children, 44% (33-55) of adults, and 37% (19-59) of older adults; with fosphenytoin in 49% (38-61) of children, 46% (34-59) of adults, and 35% (17-59) of older adults; and with valproate in 52% (41-63) of children, 46% (34-58) of adults, and 47% (25-70) of older adults. No differences were detected in efficacy or primary safety outcome by drug within each age group. With the exception of endotracheal intubation in children, secondary safety outcomes did not significantly differ by drug within each age group. INTERPRETATION: Children, adults, and older adults with established status epilepticus respond similarly to levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, and valproate, with treatment success in approximately half of patients. Any of the three drugs can be considered as a potential first-choice, second-line drug for benzodiazepine-refractory status epilepticus. FUNDING: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health.
OBJECTIVE: Status epilepticus (SE) is an emergency condition for which rapid and secured cessation is crucial. Although fosphenytoin (FPHT) is recommended as a second-line treatment, levetiracetam (LEV) reportedly has similar efficacy, but higher safety. Therefore, we herein compared LEV with FPHT in adult SE. METHODS: We initiated a multicentre randomised control trial in emergency departments with adult patients with convulsive SE. Diazepam was initially administered, followed intravenously by FPHT at 22.5 mg/kg or LEV at 1000-3000 mg. The primary outcome was assigned as the seizure cessation rate within 30 min of the administration of the study drug. RESULTS: A total of 176 adult patients with SE were enrolled (82 FPHT and 94 LEV), and 3 were excluded from the full analysis set. Seizure cessation rates within 30 min were 83.8% (67/80) in the FPHT group and 89.2% (83/93) in the LEV group. The difference in these rates was 5.5% (95% CI -4.7 to 15.7, p=0.29). The non-inferiority of LEV to FPHT was confirmed with p<0.001 by the Farrington-Manning test. No significant differences were observed in the seizure recurrence rate or intubation rate within 24 hours. Serious adverse events developed in three patients in the FPHT group and none in the LEV group (p=0.061). CONCLUSION: The efficacy of LEV was similar to that of FPHT for adult SE following the administration of diazepam. LEV may be recommended as a second-line treatment for SE along with phenytoin/FPHT. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: jRCTs031190160.
Acute zoster-associated pain develops in most patients with herpes zoster. Nonopioid analgesics are usually used to treat acute zoster-associated pain but are frequently ineffective. We administered intravenous fosphenytoin, the prodrug of phenytoin, to patients with acute zoster-associated pain to examine its analgesic efficacy and safety. At 13 medical institutions in Japan, we conducted a phase II, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial of intravenous fosphenytoin in Japanese inpatients with acute zoster-associated pain for whom nonopioid analgesics had shown an insufficient analgesic effect. The patients were randomly assigned (1:1:1) to receive a single intravenous dose of fosphenytoin at 18 mg/kg (high dose), a single intravenous dose of fosphenytoin at 12 mg/kg (low dose), or placebo. The primary endpoint was the mean change per hour (slope) in the numerical rating scale score from the baseline score until 120 min after dosing. Seventeen patients were randomly assigned to the low-dose fosphenytoin group (n = 6, median age 62.5 years, range 39-75 years), high-dose fosphenytoin group (n = 5, median age 69.0 years, range 22-75 years), and placebo group (n = 5, median age 52.0 years, range 38-72 years). One patient was excluded because of investigational drug dilution failure. This study was discontinued because of the influences of coronavirus disease 2019. The slope was significantly lower in the high- and low-dose fosphenytoin groups than in the placebo group (P < 0.001 and P = 0.016, respectively). Responsiveness to intravenous fosphenytoin (>/=2-point reduction in the numerical rating scale score from baseline to 120 min after dosing) was inferred at plasma total phenytoin concentrations of 10-15 mug/mL. Treatment-emergent adverse events caused no safety concerns in the clinical setting and intravenous fosphenytoin was well tolerated. Intravenous fosphenytoin appears to be an effective and promising alternative treatment for acute zoster-associated pain. Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04139330.
Intranasal administration could increase both safety and efficacy of drugs acting on the central nervous system, but low solubility severely limits administration through this route. Phenytoin's prodrug, fosphenytoin, is hydrophilic and freely soluble in water, but less permeable since it is dianionic. We aimed to assess whether this phosphoester prodrug could be a suitable alternative to phenytoin in intranasal delivery. Secondly, we aimed to compare simple formulation strategies in fosphenytoin delivery. Fosphenytoin formulations containing thermosensitive and/or mucoadhesive (hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, HPMC) polymers were developed, guided by viscosity, gelling temperatures, osmolality, and in vitro drug release tests. Then, a pharmacokinetic study was performed, comparing an intravenous fosphenytoin solution, an intranasal fosphenytoin solution, and intranasal fosphenytoin mucoadhesive formulations with or without albumin. Formulations containing HPMC allowed high drug strengths, and had a relatively fast release profile, which was not changed by albumin. Intranasal administration of a formulation with HPMC and albumin prolonged drug concentration over time and led to complete or even increased absolute bioavailability. Moreover, phenytoin's blood levels did not reach the high peak obtained with intravenous administration. In conclusion, the use of phosphate ester prodrugs could be an efficient and safe strategy to increase the intranasal bioavailability of poorly soluble drugs.
BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the efficacy of a single dose of phenytoin/fosphenytoin (PHT) to control repetitive seizures in children with benign convulsions with mild gastroenteritis (CwG). METHODS: Children aged between 3 months and 5 years with CwG were retrospectively enrolled. Convulsions with mild gastroenteritis were defined as (a) seizures with acute gastroenteritis without fever or dehydration; (b) normal blood laboratory results; and (c) normal electroencephalography and brain imaging findings. Patients were divided into two groups according to whether or not intravenous PHT (10 mg/kg of phenytoin or phenytoin equivalents) was administered. Clinical manifestations and treatment efficacy were evaluated and compared. RESULTS: Ten of 41 children eligible for inclusion received PHT. Compared to children in the non-PHT group, those in the PHT group had a higher number of seizures (5.2 +/- 2.3 vs. 1.6 +/- 1.0, P < 0.001) and a lower serum sodium level (133.5 +/- 3.2 mmol/L vs. 137.2 +/- 2.6 mmol/L, P = 0.001). Initial serum sodium levels were negatively correlated with seizure frequency (r = -0.438, P = 0.004). In all patients, seizures were completely resolved with a single dose of PHT. There were no significant adverse effects from PHT. CONCLUSIONS: A single dose of PHT can effectively treat CwG with repetitive seizures. The serum sodium channel may play a role in seizure severity.
OBJECTIVE: To synthesize the available evidence examining the efficacy and safety of levetiracetam compared with phenytoin or fosphenytoin in benzodiazepine-refractory pediatric status epilepticus. DATA SOURCES: We searched (from inception until April 27, 2020) Ovid MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of Science, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials. STUDY SELECTION: Two reviewers, independently and in duplicate, screened citations and manuscripts for eligible randomized controlled trials. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Independently and in duplicate, we performed data abstraction, risk of bias assessment, and certainty assessment using Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation. We performed meta-analyses using random-effect models or, if insufficient data, presented findings narratively. RESULTS: We identified seven randomized controlled trials (n = 1,575). Pooled analysis demonstrated low certainty evidence for no difference of levetiracetam on time to seizure cessation (mean difference, -3.11 min; 95% CI, -6.67 to 0.45), early seizure cessation (relative risk, 1.09, 95% CI, 0.95-1.26), or late seizure cessation (relative risk, 1.05; 95% CI, 0.93-1.18). Adverse event outcomes were limited by low event numbers. We found low certainty evidence for less respiratory depression with levetiracetam (relative risk, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.12-0.69). CONCLUSIONS: The efficacy of levetiracetam is comparable with phenytoin or fosphenytoin in children with benzodiazepine-refractory status epilepticus (low certainty evidence). Levetiracetam may cause less respiratory depression. Clinicians and guideline developers should weigh safety profiles when choosing between these agents.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficiency and safety profiles of levetiracetam and (fos)phenytoin (phenytoin or fosphenytoin) for second-line treatment of seizures by performing a meta-analysis of RCTs. METHODS: We systematically searched PubMed, Embase, Cochrane, FDA.gov, and ClinicalTrials.gov for RCTs (published before July 31, 2020; no language restrictions). Two independent reviewers screened abstracts and titles against inclusion and exclusion criteria published previously in the PROSPERO: CRD42020202736. Eleven studies fulfilled the established criteria. We assessed pooled data by using a random-effects model. Quality analysis was performed by using version 2 of the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool (RoB 2). RevMan v.5.3 was used to perform statistical analyses, and publication bias (egger's test) was assessed with Stata MP v.14.0. RESULTS: Levetiracetam was similar to (fos)phenytoin in seizure termination rate (risk ratio [RR] 0.94; 95% CI 0.87 to 1.01), time of seizure termination (mean difference [MD] 0.44; -0.60 to 1.49), and drug resistance ([RR] 1.12, 0.86 to 1.45). The safety outcome showed a significant statistical difference between fosphenytoin group and levetiracetam group ([RR] 1.44, 1.14 to 1.81), while there was no significant difference observed between phenytoin treatment and levetiracetam treatment ([RR] 1.26, 0.99 to 1.60). CONCLUSION: Levetiracetam was similar to (fos)phenytoin in cessation rate convulsive status epilepticus, and drug resistance, while it was superior (fos)phenytoin in pooled safety outcome. Further exploration is still needed as to whether it is the first choice for second-line drugs.
BACKGROUND: Seizures occur frequently in pediatric patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI), particularly abusive head trauma (AHT). There are limited data on the effectiveness of fosphenytoin and levetiracetam to prevent posttraumatic seizures. METHODS: We performed a retrospective single center cohort study of children < 3 years old admitted with mild [Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score 13-15], moderate (GCS 9-12), and severe (GCS 3-8) TBI at a level I trauma center from 2011 to 2021. Antiseizure medications were used at the discretion of the treating physicians. Nonparametric tests were used to compare antiseizure medication prophylaxis and TBI etiology. RESULTS: A total of 717 patients (263 with AHT, 454 with accidental TBI) were included, of whom 135 (19%) received fosphenytoin, 152 (21%) received levetiracetam, and 430 (60%) did not receive any seizure prophylaxis. Over the study period, the use of fosphenytoin prophylaxis decreased (R(2) = 0.67, p = 0.004), whereas the use of levetiracetam increased (R(2) = 0.51, p = 0.008). Additionally, the occurrence of early posttraumatic seizures decreased (R(2) = 0.58, p = 0.006). Children with AHT were more likely to receive any seizure prophylaxis than those with accidental TBI (52% vs. 27%; p < 0.001) and were more likely to have >/= 1 seizure during hospitalization (22% vs. 4%; p < 0.001). Among children who received seizure prophylaxis, those who received fosphenytoin had a higher occurrence of seizures than those who received levetiracetam (33% vs.18%; p = 0.004). After controlling for age, admission year, TBI mechanism, and severity of injury, we observed no differences in seizure occurrence between groups. CONCLUSIONS: In children < 3 years old with TBI, no differences were observed in occurrence of seizures between patients who received fosphenytoin and patients who received levetiracetam prophylaxis after controlling for patient factors including severity of injury. Levetiracetam may be an equally effective alternative to fosphenytoin for seizure prophylaxis for early posttraumatic seizure prevention in this age group.
INTRODUCTION: We aimed to evaluate the pediatric fosphenytoin dosing regimen, including optimal timing for the measurement of total serum phenytoin concentration (C(PHT)). METHODS: We retrospectively investigated pediatric patients with status epilepticus or seizure clusters treated with fosphenytoin between April 2013 and March 2018. Two C(PHT) measurements were analyzed, one 2-4 h after the loading dose and another before the second dose. Individual pharmacokinetic parameters were estimated using the Bayesian method and were used to simulate C(PHT). RESULTS: The present study involved 12 pediatric patients; the loading dose of fosphenytoin was 22.1 (17.2-27.2) mg/kg. The C(PHT) was 13.4 (8.6-18.9) mug/mL 2-4 h after the loading dose. The C(PHT) estimated from individual pharmacokinetic parameters 12 and 24 h after the loading dose was 9.5 (6.7-14.2) and 5.8 (3.7-10.0) mug/mL, respectively. If fosphenytoin was administered at a loading dose of 22.5 mg/kg and a maintenance dose of 5 or 7.5 mg/kg (administered every 12 h, starting 12 h after the loading dose), then the C(PHT) on day 8 was estimated to be 5.74 (2.6-15.4) mug/mL at 5 mg/kg and 13.9 (5.7-31.0) mug/mL at 7.5 mg/kg. CONCLUSIONS: In pediatric patients, a maintenance dose of fosphenytoin should be started 12 h after the loading dose, and a maintenance dose of 5-7.5 mg/kg/dose every 12 h may be better than every 24 h. We recommend measuring C(PHT) at 2 and 12 h after the loading dose to simplify and safely adjust the dosage in clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: Recommended loading doses (LDs) of phenytoin and fosphenytoin range from 10 to 25 mg/kg. Few studies have examined the LD requirements in male versus female patients and in patients who are obese. OBJECTIVES: To examine the influence of obesity and sex on phenytoin LDs. METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study comparing free phenytoin or fosphenytoin serum concentrations following LDs in male versus female and nonobese versus obese patients. An equation used for determining LDs in obese patients was evaluated. RESULTS: There were 141 nonobese and 54 obese patients. When adjusted for total body weight, the obese cohort received a smaller LD than the nonobese cohort (17 mg/kg, interquartile range [IQR] = 14.9-20.0, vs 20 mg/kg, IQR = 18.6-20.0, respectively; P < 0.001). There was no difference between the 2 cohorts in the measured free phenytoin concentration following the LD (obese: 1.7 microg/mL [IQR = 1.4-2.0]; nonobese: 1.8 microg/mL [IQR = 1.5-2.1]; P = 0.16). In the obese cohort, men received a significantly lower weight-based phenytoin dose compared with women (15 mg/kg [IQR = 14.0-19.2], vs 19.9 mg/kg [IQR = 15.0-20.0], respectively; P = 0.008). Postload free phenytoin concentrations were similar between the 2 groups (male: 1.6 microg/mL [IQR = 1.2-2.1]; female: 1.7 microg/mL [IQR = 1.4-2.0]; P = 0.24). Conclusion and Relevance: Phenytoin and fosphenytoin LDs of at least 15 mg/kg of actual body weight are more likely to lead to desired free phenytoin concentrations. Obese female patients need a larger weight-based dose than male patients to achieve similar postload phenytoin concentrations.
The aim of our study was to identify all previously reported cases of phenytoin- or fosphenytoin-associated purple glove syndrome (PGS) and summarize the most current understanding of the pathophysiology, clinical presentation, diagnosis, and treatment of the disease. We searched the English language references from MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, TOXNET, and gray literature that featured one or more case descriptions of phenytoin- or fosphenytoin-associated PGS after administration and provided information on the clinical setting of the event and associated outcome(s). Descriptive statistics were employed to summarize relevant facts about the cases. We identified 82 unique cases of parenteral phenytoin-associated PGS and 5 cases of fosphenytoin-associated PGS that were published from 1984 to 2015. Additionally, we found two cases of PGS associated with oral formulation of phenytoin published from 1999 to 2015. The spectrum of tissue injury ranged from mild local cutaneous reactions around the infusion site to frank limb ischemia. Just over a half of cases reported symptoms after one dose of IV phenytoin. Pathologic findings included evidence for microvascular thrombosis and possible microvascular or subclinical extravasation as a contributing mechanism. Dopper ultrasound and conventional angiography were used in some patients to identify arterial or venous thrombosis. Various treatments were documented including the use of supportive care such as limb elevation and heat or cold application, utilization of systemic antibiotics, anticoagulants, or vasodilators, and local infiltration of hyaluronidase, heparin, or other compounds. In a small number of patients, invasive interventions such as regional anesthesia, thrombectomy, fasciotomy, and debridement were described. Time to resolution varied from days to weeks. Resolution of PGS without deficits was documented in the majority of cases. Skin changes followed by sensory and motor deficits were described in 16, 6, and 5 cases, respectively. Four patients underwent skin grafting and eight patients required limb amputation. Death as a result of PGS was documented in two patients. PGS associated with oral and injectable phenytoin or parenteral fosphenytoin has been documented in the literature and sometimes includes significant vascular thrombosis and potentially limb-threatening ischemia. Avoidance of small hand veins, adherence to recommended IV administration guidelines and monitoring of the infusion site for reactions should be considered to decrease the morbidity of IV phenytoin or fosphenytoin use. Patients with PGS and evidence of decreased distal perfusion should undergo prompt vascular imaging and potential intervention to avoid ischemic sequelae. Alternative anticonvulsant drugs should be considered in patients at risk for PGS when possible.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetic profile of fosphenytoin, a water-soluble phenytoin prodrug, after intramuscular and intravenous administration. DESIGN: Open-label study of intramuscular administration, and double-blind, randomized study of intravenous administration. SETTING: Six and ten hospitals throughout the United States for the intramuscular and intravenous multicenter studies, respectively. PATIENTS: Neurosurgical patients who required anticonvulsant prophylaxis or treatment. INTERVENTIONS: In the intramuscular study, 118 patients received loading doses ranging from 480-1500 mg phenytoin equivalents (PE) and daily maintenance doses ranging from 130-1250 mg PE for 3-14 days. In the intravenous study, 88 patients received fosphenytoin and 28 received phenytoin sodium for 3-14 days. Mean +/- SD loading doses and maintenance doses of intravenous fosphenytoin and phenytoin were 1082 +/- 299 mg PE and 411 +/- 221 mg PE, and 1082 +/- 299 mg and 422 +/- 197 mg, respectively. Trough phenytoin concentrations were measured daily in all patients. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Intramuscular fosphenytoin was safe and well tolerated, with no irritation found for 99% of all injection site evaluations. Adverse events associated with the drug occurred in 9% of patients, commonly those typical of the parent drug. For intravenous treatment, the frequency of mild irritation at the infusion site was significantly lower in the fosphenytoin group (6%) than in the phenytoin group (25%, p < 0.05). Reductions in infusion rates were required in 17% and 36% of fosphenytoin and phenytoin recipients, respectively. No significant difference was observed relative to adverse events or seizure frequency between the groups. Trough plasma phenytoin concentrations were approximately 10 micrograms/ml or greater in patients receiving at least 3 days of intramuscular and intravenous fosphenytoin. Trough phenytoin concentrations were similar between patients receiving intravenous phenytoin and fosphenytoin on all study days. CONCLUSION: Fosphenytoin can be administered intramuscularly and intravenously in neurosurgical patients to achieve and maintain therapeutic phenytoin concentrations for up to 14 days. Both routes are safe and well tolerated. Intravenous fosphenytoin is significantly better tolerated than intravenous phenytoin sodium in this patient subset.
INTRODUCTION: Intravenous fosphenytoin is widely used for acute exacerbation of trigeminal neuralgia, however, few studies have investigated this treatment. We aimed to examine the efficacy and side effects of initial intravenous fosphenytoin plus oral tapering of phenytoin for exacerbation of trigeminal neuralgia. METHODS: Consecutive patients with primary trigeminal neuralgia were included in this prospective observational 90-days follow-up study. Data were collected using standardized interviews before, at 24 hours, day 7, 30 and 90 post loading dose. The primary outcome was the proportion of responders defined as a 50% reduction in pain intensity 24 hours post loading dose. RESULTS: We included 15 patients. Nine patients (60%) were responders. Pain intensity 24 hours post loading dose was reduced by 5.00 points on the numerical rating scale (p < 0.001), and at day 7 by 5.5 points (p < 0.001). The most common side effects were hypotension and dizziness. CONCLUSION: Intravenous fosphenytoin relieves trigeminal neuralgia pain in most patients and provides a window for titrating prophylactic trigeminal neuralgia medications or planning neurosurgery. The decision to administer intravenous fosphenytoin should be taken with support from trigeminal neuralgia experts and involves considerations of co-morbidities and other treatment options for acute exacerbation of trigeminal neuralgia.Clinical Trial: Preregistered (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03712254.
Phenytoin is a low solubility anticonvulsant drug. It has, nonetheless, other possible therapeutic indications, such as neuropathic pain, including trigeminal neuralgia, or wound healing. Its use has decreased due to side effects, but nasal/intranasal administration could significantly increase drug safety and efficacy. The aim of this work was to develop and study nanoemulsions and thermosensitive nanoemulgels of phenytoin and fosphenytoin, in combination, for intranasal administration, with immediate and sustained release profiles. Nanoemulsions were prepared by adding the aqueous phase, containing gelling polymers in the case of nanoemulgels, to emulsion preconcentrates, followed, in the optimized procedure, by premix membrane emulsification. Formulation design and optimization was guided by drug strength, rheological behavior, osmolality, mean droplet size and polydispersity. Fosphenytoin interfered significantly with Carbopol but not with Pluronic's gelation, and allowed to achieve drug strengths equivalent to 22 or 27 mg/g of phenytoin in lead nanoemulsions, and 16.7 mg/g of phenytoin in the lead nanoemulgel. The final selected low viscosity nanoemulsions had an immediate or prolonged fosphenytoin release profile, depending of anhydrous phase proportion (10% or 40%, respectively). The thermosensitive nanoemulgel, with 10% anhydrous phase, showed prolonged drug release. Future studies will establish whether they are more suited for topical effects or therapeutic brain delivery.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of intravenous fosphenytoin in children with status epilepticus, and resulting serum total phenytoin levels. METHODS: In this prospective study, 51 children aged less than 18 years received intravenous loading dose of fosphenytoin (18-20 mg/kg). Serum total phenytoin levels were estimated at 90 -100 minutes. Outcomes studied were (i) seizure control and local and/or systemic adverse effects in next 24 hours and (ii) phenytoin levels and its correlation with dose received, seizure control and adverse effects. RESULTS: The actual dose of fosphenytoin received varied from 15.1 to 25 mg/kg. Seizures were controlled in 45 (88%) children and, two required additional dose of 10 mg/kg. None of the children showed any local or systemic adverse effects. Serum total phenytoin levels were in the therapeutic range (10-20 microg/mL) in 12 (23.5%), sub-therapeutic in 16 (31.3%) and supra-therapeutic in 25 (49%) children. There was weak correlation of the phenytoin levels with dose of fosphenytoin received, seizure control, or adverse effects. CONCLUSIONS: Intravenous fosphenytoin loading dose of 20 mg/kg is effective in controlling seizures in 88% of children with status epilepticus, with a good safety profile. Seizure control and adverse effects appear to be independent of serum total phenytoin levels achieved.
The Established Status Epilepticus Treatment Trial was a blinded, comparative-effectiveness study of fosphenytoin, levetiracetam, and valproic acid in benzodiazepine-refractory status epilepticus. The primary outcome was clinical seizure cessation and increased responsiveness without additional anticonvulsant medications. Weight-based dosing was capped at 75 kg. Hence, patients weighing >75 kg received a lower mg/kg dose. Logistic regression models were developed in 235 adults to determine the association of weight (</= or >75 kg, </= or >90 kg), sex, treatment, and weight-normalized dose with the primary outcome and solely seizure cessation. The primary outcome was achieved in 45.1% and 42.5% of those </=75 kg and >75 kg, respectively. Using univariate analyses, the likelihood of success for those >75 kg (odds ratio [OR] = 0.9, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.54-1.51) or >90 kg (OR = 0.85, 95% CI = 0.42-1.66) was not statistically different compared with those </=75 kg or </=90 kg, respectively. Similarly, other predictors were not significantly associated with primary outcome or clinical seizure cessation. Our findings suggest that doses, capped at 75 kg, likely resulted in concentrations greater than those needed for outcome. Studies that include drug concentrations and heavier individuals are needed to confirm these findings.
INTRODUCTION: Busulfan is a chemotherapy agent used in hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) conditioning regimens. Busulfan is associated with tonic-clonic seizures in ~10% of patients if administered without seizure prophylaxis. Historically, phenytoin was the most commonly utilized seizure prophylaxis agent; however, phenytoin is associated with CYP450 drug interactions and potentially increases the clearance of busulfan. Levetiracetam is being used more recently for busulfan seizure prophylaxis and is not associated with drug-drug interactions; however, data supporting use in pediatric patients are limited. The primary objective is to determine whether there is any difference in seizure rates or safety profile between phenytoin and levetiracetam when used for seizure prophylaxis. METHODS: We conducted a retrospective chart review including patients who received busulfan between 2010 and 2019 were identified. The data were evaluated to compare the incidence of busulfan-induced seizures in HSCT patients receiving either phenytoin or levetiracetam and to determine the impact of drug-drug interactions on treatment outcomes/adverse events. RESULTS: A total of 342 patients were included with a median age of six years. Overall, five patients within the phenytoin group (n = 126) (4%) and zero patients in the levetiracetam group (n = 216) experienced a seizure (P = .007). There were no differences in liver enzyme elevations, recurrence rates of primary disease, and veno-occlusive disease. CONCLUSION: Levetiracetam is effective at preventing seizures associated with busulfan administration with no clinically significant adverse effects when compared to phenytoin.
