BACKGROUND: It has been a matter of much debate whether the co-administration of furosemide and albumin can achieve better diuresis and natriuresis than furosemide treatment alone. There is inconsistency in published trials regarding the effect of this combination therapy. We, therefore, conducted this meta-analysis to explore the efficacy of furosemide and albumin co-administration and the factors potentially influencing the diuretic effect of such co-administration. METHODS: In accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, we searched the PubMed, Embase, Medline, and Cochrane databases. Prospective studies with adult populations which comparing the effect of furosemide and albumin co-administration with furosemide alone were included. The outcomes including diuretic effect and natriuresis effect measured by hourly urine output and hourly urine sodium excretion from both groups were extracted. Random effect model was applied for conducting meta-analysis. Subgroup analysis and sensitivity analysis were performed to explore potential sources of heterogeneity of treatment effects. RESULTS: By including 13 studies with 422 participants, the meta-analysis revealed that furosemide with albumin co-administration increased urine output by 31.45 ml/hour and increased urine excretion by 1.76 mEq/hour in comparison to furosemide treatment alone. The diuretic effect of albumin and furosemide co-administration was better in participants with low baseline serum albumin levels (< 2.5 g/dL) and high prescribed albumin infusion doses (> 30 g), and the effect was more significant within 12 hours after administration. Diuretic effect of co-administration was better in those with baseline Cr > 1.2 mg/dL and natriuresis effect of co-administration was better in those with baseline eGFR < 60 ml/min/1.73m2. CONCLUSION: Co-administration of furosemide with albumin might enhance diuresis and natriuresis effects than furosemide treatment alone but with high heterogeneity in treatment response. According to the present meta-analysis, combination therapy might provide advantages compared to the furosemide therapy alone in patients with baseline albumin levels lower than 2.5 g/dL or in patients receiving higher albumin infusion doses or in patients with impaired renal function. Owing to high heterogeneity and limited enrolled participants, further parallel randomized controlled trials are warranted to examine our outcome. REGISTRATION: PROSEPRO ID: CRD42020211002; https://clinicaltrials.gov/.
Therapeutic Reviews aim to provide essential independent information for health professionals about drugs used in palliative and hospice care. Additional content is available on www.palliativedrugs.com. Country-specific books (Hospice and Palliative Care Formulary USA, and Palliative Care Formulary, British and Canadian editions) are also available and can be ordered from www.palliativedrugs.com. The series editors welcome feedback on the articles (hq@palliativedrugs.com).
Bumetanide and furosemide are potent loop diuretics; the former is 40 to 50 times more potent than the latter on a weight basis. Bumetanide is absorbed more quickly than furosemide and is twice as bioavailable. Both drugs exhibit changes in elimination in the presence of renal insufficiency as well as changes in the time course of absorption in congestive heart failure. More data are needed to assess potential differences between them in various clinical conditions.
Furosemide (frusemide) is a potent loop diuretic used in the treatment of oedematous states associated with cardiac, renal and hepatic failure, and for the treatment of hypertension. Therapy is frequently complicated by apparently erratic systemic availability from the oral route and from unpredictable responses to a given dosage. The exact mechanism of action is not fully understood, but furosemide is believed to act at the luminal surface of the ascending limb of the loop of Henle by inhibiting the active reabsorption of chloride. The response to a given dosage is modulated by the fluid and electrolyte balance of the individual. Acute and delayed tolerance has been demonstrated both in animals and in man, and is postulated to be due to the intervention of homeostatic mechanisms influencing fluid and electrolyte balances. Furosemide is delivered to its site of action by active secretion via the nonspecific organic acid pump. Comparisons between the observed diuresis/saluresis and plasma furosemide concentrations, urinary excretion rates and renal clearance found either negative or no correlations with plasma drug concentration but significant correlations with urine measurements. Response is related to the concentration of the drug in urine rather than in plasma. The most common adverse reactions attributable to furosemide therapy are essentially extensions of the therapeutic effects (i.e. fluid and electrolyte disturbances). The pharmacokinetic behaviour of furosemide is marked by a large degree of variability, derived from differences within and between both subjects and study protocols. Part of this variability can be attributed to differences in organ function, which is important in view of the types of patients treated with furosemide. On the other hand, a large proportion remains as inter- and intrasubject variation. The bioavailability of furosemide from oral dosage forms is highly variable. The poor bioavailability has been hypothesized to be due to the poor solubility of the compound, site-specific absorption, presystemic metabolism and/or other unknown mechanisms. Furosemide is highly bound to plasma proteins, almost exclusively to albumin. Although the drug is insoluble in water and favours partitioning into fatty tissue, the high degree of plasma protein binding restricts the apparent volume of distribution at steady-state to values within a multiple of 2 to 5 times the plasma volume. Furosemide has two documented metabolites--furosemide glucuronide and saluamine (CSA). The first is an accepted metabolic product, whereas the status of CSA as a metabolite is highly controversial.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
Furosemide is a diuretic and is used for the treatment of patients with heart failure (HF). It has been found that in some HF patients, the drug does not treat patients efficiently. This condition is named as furosemide resistance. In this study, it is aimed to investigate the relationship between UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1 (UGT1A1) and interleukine-6 (IL-6) variations with furosemide resistance in HF patients. Sixty HF patients using furosemide (patient group) and 30 healthy individuals (control group) were enrolled in this study. Patients were divided into two subgroups as non-responders (furosemide resistant) group (n = 30) and the responders (non-resistant) group (n = 30) according to the presence of furosemide resistance (n = 30). Variations in the first exon of UGT1A1 and rs1800795 and rs1800796 variations in IL-6 were analyzed by direct sequencing and real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), respectively. The effects of newly detected mutations on 3-D protein structure were analyzed by in silico analysis. At the end of the study, 11 variations were detected in UGT1A1, of which nine of them are novel and eight of them cause amino acid change. Also, rs1800795 and rs1800796 variations were detected in all the groups. When patient and control groups were compared with each other, rs1800796 mutation in IL-6 was found statistically high in the patient group (p = 0.027). When the three groups were compared with each other, similarly, rs1800796 mutation in IL-6 was found statistically high in the non-responders group (p = 0.043). When allele distributions were compared between the patient and control groups, the C allele of rs1800795 mutation in IL-6 was found statistically high in the patient group (p = 0.032). When allele distributions were compared between the three groups, 55T-insertion in UGT1A1 was found statistically high in the non-responders group (p = 0.017). According to in silico analysis results, two variations were found deleterious and six variations were detected as probably damaging to protein functions. Our study may contribute to the elucidation of pharmacogenetic features (drug response-gene relationship) and the development of individual-specific treatment strategies in HF patients using furosemide.
The diuretic effect of the combined furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline among pediatric patients remains unclear. The primary aim of this systematic review was to examine the clinical diuretic effects (urine output and fluid balance) of co-administration of furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline as compared to furosemide alone in pediatric population. Ovid MEDLINE, CENTRAL, and EMBASE were searched from its inception until March 2022 for observational studies and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing the administration of furosemide versus furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline in pediatric population. Case reports, case series, commentaries, letters to editors, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses were excluded. Five articles with a total sample population of 187 patients were included in this systematic review. As compared to the furosemide alone, our pooled data demonstrated that co-administration of furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline was associated with higher urine output (mean difference: 2.91 [90% CI 1.54 to 4.27], p < 0.0001, I(2) = 90%) and a more negative fluid balance (mean difference - 28.27 [95% CI: - 46.21 to - 10.33], p = 0.002, I(2) = 56%) than those who received furosemide alone. CONCLUSION: This is the first paper summarizing the evidence of combined use of furosemide with aminophylline/theophylline in pediatric population. Our systematic review demonstrated that the co-administration of furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline could potentially yield better diuretic effects of urine output and negative fluid balance than furosemide alone in pediatric patients with fluid overload. Given the substantial degree of heterogeneity and low level of evidence, future adequately powered trials are warranted to provide evidence regarding the combined use of aminophylline/theophylline and furosemide as diuretic in the pediatric population. WHAT IS KNOWN: * Fluid overload is associated with poor prognosis for children in the intensive care unit. * The ineffective result of furosemide alone, even at high dose, as diuretic agent for children with diuretic resistant fluid overload in the intensive care unit. WHAT IS NEW: * This is the first systematic review that compares furosemide alone and co-administration of furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline. * This paper showed potential benefit of co-administration of furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline promoting urine output and negative fluid balance compared to furosemide alone.
Furosemide, a potent loop diuretic, is frequently used in different stages of acute kidney injury, but its clinical roles remain uncertain. This review summarises the pharmacology of furosemide, its potential uses and side effects, and the evidence of its efficacy. Furosemide is actively secreted by the proximal tubules into the urine before reaching its site of action at the ascending limb of loop of Henle. It is the urinary concentrations of furosemide that determine its diuretic effect. The severity of acute kidney injury has a significant effect on the diuretic response to furosemide; a good 'urinary response' may be considered as a 'proxy' for having some residual renal function. The current evidence does not suggest that furosemide can reduce mortality in patients with acute kidney injury. In patients with acute lung injury without haemodynamic instability, furosemide may be useful in achieving fluid balance to facilitate mechanical ventilation according to the lung-protective ventilation strategy.
We describe a 5-month-old infant who had fever of unknown origin leading to an exhaustive evaluation during a 7-week period. Fever caused by the use of furosemide was proved; the fever resolved after discontinuation of this medication and recurred after its reintroduction.
beta-Amyloid (Abeta) triggered proteopathic and immunopathic processes are a postulated cause of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Monomeric Abeta is derived from amyloid precursor protein, whereupon it aggregates into various assemblies, including oligomers and fibrils, which disrupt neuronal membrane integrity and induce cellular damage. Abeta is directly neurotoxic/synaptotoxic, but may also induce neuroinflammation through the concomitant activation of microglia. Previously, we have shown that furosemide is a known anthranilate-based drug with the capacity to downregulate the proinflammatory microglial M1 phenotype and upregulate the anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype. To further explore the pharmacologic effects of furosemide, this study reports a series of furosemide analogs that target both Abeta aggregation and neuroinflammation, thereby addressing the combined proteopathic-immunopathic pathogenesis of AD. Forty compounds were synthesized and evaluated. Compounds 3c, 3g, and 20 inhibited Abeta oligomerization; 33 and 34 inhibited Abeta fibrillization. 3g and 34 inhibited the production of TNF-alpha, IL-6, and nitric oxide, downregulated the expression of COX-2 and iNOS, and promoted microglial phagocytotic activity, suggesting dual activity against Abeta aggregation and neuroinflammation. Our data demonstrate the potential therapeutic utility of the furosemide-like anthranilate platform in the development of drug-like molecules targeting both the proteopathy and immunopathy of AD.
The literature on furosemide pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics is critically reviewed, concentrating on those papers published subsequent to the 1979 reviews of this topic. Intravenous and oral data are presented for healthy volunteers and for patients with various disease states. It is the latter populations about which the majority of the studies have been published since 1979. Inter- and intraindividual variations in bioavailability are discussed, as are data on the metabolism of furosemide to its glucuronide conjugate. Published studies examining the relationship between furosemide pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics are also evaluated. The literature is reviewed through June 1988.
A new delivery mechanism provides subcutaneous infusion of furosemide to treat fluid overload in adults with heart failure.
Rectal suppositories containing furosemide (4-chloro-N-furfuryl-5-sulfamoylanthranilic acid) and furosemide sodium were formulated with various suppository bases. The in vitro drug release of Massa Estarinum 299 proved to be the best from the vehicle having various physical-chemical properties. The diuretic effect of the two suppositories was compared in a prospective, crossover clinical trial including 8 patients. Both preparations have induced an increase of urine flow, which was comparable to the diuretic effect of the tablet.
The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics following administration of furosemide (40 mg intravenously) have been studied before and after treatment with probenecid (0.5 gm orally every 6 hr for 3 days) and spironolactone (200-mg initial oral dose followed by 50 mg every 6 hr for 3 days) in 6 normal male subjects. Urine losses during each study period were replaced with saline-dextrose-KCl intravenously. The study was performed with the use of a Latin-square design. Probenecid pretreatment induced significant reductions in renal clearance of furosemide by 78%, the extrarenal clearance by 56%, and the volume of distribution by 52%. As a consequence, furosemide half-life was increased by 54%. Probenecid significantly reduced the rate of sodium excretion at all plasma concentrations of furosemide, but the ratio between urinary furosemide concentration and urinary sodium concentration was not altered. Since the proportion of furosemide excreted unchanged in the urine was not markedly changed, total diuretic response was not influenced by probenecid. There was no evidence of any pharmacokinetic interaction between spironolactone and furosemide. The relationship of furosemide kinetics to dynamics observed in these studies confirms that, in man, the diuretic response is determined by drug that reaches the renal tubule rather than the drug level in plasma.
In diseases with generalized edema caused by decompensated heart and liver diseases or kidney failure digitalis preparations, diuretics and theophylline -- if lung disease accompanies one of the above states -- are often used. Literature dealing with theophylline, digoxin and furosemide pharmacokinetics in edematous diseases was analyzed as well as theophylline or digoxin interactions with furosemide. The results obtained in these investigations are very dissimilar, even contradictory. In all the drugs investigated, it was found that serum drug concentration was reduced, that there were no changes in comparison with non-edematous diseases and that drug concentrations were elevated in edematous diseases. Many problems in this field remain unsolved requiring further investigations of digoxin, theophylline and furosemide pharmacokinetics in liver, heart and kidney diseases accompanied by edema. As these drugs are often administered in these states, and having in mind their narrow therapeutic range (digoxin, theophylline), intoxication or a drug concentration decrease below the possibility of inducing any therapeutic effect are possible.
In various clinical situations a poor diuretic response to furosemide may be improved by the addition of metolazone. The mechanism of this additive effect is unclear. The purpose of the present investigation was to establish whether metolazone changes the pharmacokinetics of furosemide and by this mechanism enhances the diuretic effect. Eight volunteers were given an intravenous infusion of 4 mg h-1 of furosemide for 12 h. After 6 h 2.5 mg metolazone were administered orally. The addition of metolazone increased diuresis, urinary excretion of sodium and chloride (P less than 0.01), but decreased urinary excretion of calcium (P less than 0.01), while furosemide excretion remained unchanged. Total body clearance and renal clearance values of furosemide were similar before and after administration of metolazone. Our data confirm the additive diuretic effect of the combination treatment metolazone-furosemide and show for the first time a distinct hypocalciuric action of metolazone, similar to thiazides. Moreover metolazone does not affect the pharmacokinetics of furosemide.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of furosemide following gastroretentive dosage from (GRDF) administration. A furosemide (60 mg) GRDF, releasing the drug during 6 hours in vitro, or an immediate-release tablet was administered to healthy male volunteers (N = 14) in a crossover design. Food and liquid intake were standardized; urine was collected, weighed, and assayed for furosemide and sodium concentrations. Pharmacokinetics of furosemide following the GRDF administration, as compared to the tablet, showed lower Cmax and indicated a prolonged absorption phase leading to longer mean residence time in the stomach. The sustained input of the drug significantly improved diuretic and natriuretic efficiencies during the first 5 hours and thereby increased the total effects measured over 24 hours. The unfolding controlled-release GRDF of furosemide improved the pharmacodynamic actions due to the sustained absorption in the stomach and jejunum, which delayed the body's counteractivity to the drug effect.
BACKGROUND: Recent evidence suggests that inhaled nedocromil and furosemide are effective in preventing asthma by ultrasonically nebulized distilled water, allergen, and exercise. There are, however, no studies that compare the effects of these two drugs. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of inhaled furosemide (30 mg), nedocromil (4 mg), the combination of these two drugs, and placebo aerosol in preventing exercise-induced asthma. METHODS: Twenty-four children with exercise-induced asthma, aged 6 to 16 years, performed a treadmill test before and 20 minutes after a single dose of drug(s) in a double-blind trial. Lung function measurements were taken before drug administration, before the exercise test (20 minutes after drug administration), and then 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 15, 20, and 30 minutes after the exercise test. RESULTS: Both active drugs performed significantly better than placebo. In fact, the exercise challenge resulted in a mean maximum fall in forced expiratory volume in 1 second of 28.46% +/- 13.84% after administration of placebo, but of only 15.42% +/- 8.35% after administration of nedocromil (p < 0.001) and of 11.37% +/- 9.14% after administration of furosemide (p < 0.001). When the two drugs were given together, there was a statistically significant additive effect because the mean maximum fall in forced expiratory volume in 1 second was 5.75% +/- 3.57% (nedocromil vs nedocromil + fluorsemide: p < 0.001; furosemide vs nedocromil + furosemide: p < 0.01). CONCLUSION: This study suggests that nedocromil and furosemide provide a comparable effect in preventing exercise-induced asthma in children. The combined administration of the two drugs significantly increases the protective effects, suggesting a potential therapeutic use.
