The gabapentinoids, gabapentin, and pregabalin, target the alpha(2)delta subunits of voltage-gated calcium channels. Initially licensed for pain and seizures, they have become widely prescribed drugs. Many of these uses are off-label for psychiatric indications, and there is increasing concern about their safety, so it is particularly important to have good evidence to justify this usage. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of the evidence for three of their common psychiatric uses: bipolar disorder, anxiety, and insomnia. Fifty-five double-blind randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and 15 open-label studies were identified. For bipolar disorder, four double-blind RCTs investigating gabapentin, and no double-blind RCTs investigating pregabalin, were identified. A quantitative synthesis could not be performed due to heterogeneity in the study population, design and outcome measures. Across the anxiety spectrum, a consistent but not universal effect in favour of gabapentinoids compared to placebo was seen (standardised mean difference [SMD] ranging between -2.25 and -0.25). Notably, pregabalin (SMD -0.55, 95% CI -0.92 to -0.18) and gabapentin (SMD -0.92, 95% CI -1.32 to -0.52) were more effective than placebo in reducing preoperative anxiety. In insomnia, results were inconclusive. We conclude that there is moderate evidence of the efficacy of gabapentinoids in anxiety states, but minimal evidence in bipolar disorder and insomnia and they should be used for these disorders only with strong justification. This recommendation applies despite the attractive pharmacological and genetic rationale for targeting voltage-gated calcium channels.
Gabapentin (Neurontin (1) ) and pregabalin (Lyrica (2) ) are first- and second-generation alpha2delta ligands, respectively, and are both approved for use as adjunctive therapy in pain control. Although they do not bind to gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors they have been successfully used to treat neuropathic pain conditions. Their mechanism of action is not yet fully understood, but research has demonstrated promising results. Despite their similarities, they have been used in combination in both clinical and research situations, and have been noted to have a synergistic effect in pain control without concern for clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions. This combined approach can be made use of to reduce the dose of an individual agent, its side effects, and to enhance therapeutic response compared to a single agent. Pharmacokinetics, drug interactions, and adverse reaction to combinations have to be taken into consideration before combination therapy with gabapentin and pregabalin is proposed as first-line treatment in refractory pain situations and in patients with low levels of tolerance for an individual agent.
BACKGROUND: Gabapentin is the most commonly preferred agent for neuropathic pain in general practice as it is usually well tolerated, but occasionally, its toxicity may occur at standard doses, especially in elderly individuals, even without any prior comorbidities. CASE: We present an elderly male with normal renal parameters, who was started on gabapentin for neuropathic pain. He developed multifocal myoclonus all over the body within few days after starting gabapentin and subsided completed after withdrawal of the drug. CONCLUSION: Acute hyperkinetic movement disorders such as multifocal or segmental myoclonus in elderly patients warrant a prompt review of recent drug history, especially gabapentin, even in the background of normal renal function.
Gabapentin [1-(aminomethyl)cyclohexaneacetic acid, C9H17NO2] is a zwitterion in the solid state. Its crystal structure involves extensive hydrogen bonding between the NH3(+) and COO(-) groups of neighboring molecules. The structure of gabapentin monohydrate [1-(aminomethyl)cyclohexaneacetic acid monohydrate, C9H17NO2-H2O] also involves such hydrogen bonding and, in addition, has a hydrogen-bonding network comprising the water molecules and both the NH3(+) and COO(-) groups.
CONTEXT: Limited data existed on the efficacy and safety of novel antiepileptic drugs (pregabalin and gabapentin) in treating pruritus. OBJECTIVES: To assess their role in managing either acute or chronic pruritus. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, and Web of Science databases for relevant randomized controlled trials. Pooled odd ratio (OR) with 95% CI were performed using RevMan5.4 and R4.3.1. RESULTS: Analysis of 27 articles involving 2,016 patients showed significant reduction in pruritus incidence (OR, 0.30 [CI, 0.22-0.4]; I(2)=1%) and improvements in VAS (MD, 2.76 [CI, 0.95-4.57]; I(2)=98%) and 5-D scores (MD, 3.42 [CI, 2.10-4.75]; I(2)=92%) with pregabalin/gabapentin compared to controls. Adverse effects mainly included dizziness, somnolence, nausea and vomiting, dry mouth, constipation, and anxiety, with no significant difference between the groups (OR, 1.08 [CI, 0.32-3.59]; I(2)=76%). CONCLUSION: The novel antiepileptic drugs pregabalin and gabapentin demonstrated significant therapeutic value in the treatment of pruritus, with a favorable safety profile. Compared to commonly used pruritus treatments such as antihistamines and antidepressants, these medications offered a promising alternative.
PURPOSE: Endotracheal intubation is the gold standard for securing the airway before surgery. Nevertheless, this procedure can produce an activation of the sympathetic nervous system and result in a hemodynamic response which, in high-risk patients, may lead to cardiovascular instability and myocardial ischemia. The aim of this review was to evaluate whether gabapentin can attenuate this response and whether such an attenuation could translate into reduced myocardial ischemia and mortality. SOURCE: We searched MEDLINE((R)), EMBASE, CINAHL, AMED, and unpublished clinical trial databases for randomized-controlled trials that compared gabapentin with control, fentanyl, clonidine, or beta blockers for attenuating the hemodynamic response to intubation. Primary outcomes were mortality, myocardial infarction, and myocardial ischemia. Secondary outcomes were hemodynamic changes following intubation. PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We included 29 randomized trials with only two studies at low risk of bias. No data were provided for the primary outcomes and no studies included high-risk patients. The use of gabapentin resulted in attenuation in the rise in mean arterial blood pressure [mean difference (MD), -12 mmHg; 95% confidence interval (CI), -17 to -8] and heart rate (MD, -8 beats.min(-1); 95% CI, -11 to -5) one minute after intubation. Gabapentin also reduced the risk of hypertension or tachycardia requiring treatment (risk ratio, 0.15; 95% CI, 0.05 to 0.48). Data were limited on adverse hemodynamic events such as bradycardia and hypotension. CONCLUSION: It remains unknown whether gabapentin improves clinically relevant outcomes such as death and myocardial infarction since studies failed to report on these. Nevertheless, gabapentin attenuated increases in heart rate and blood pressure following intubation when compared with the control group. Even so, the studies included in this review were at potential risk of bias. Moreover, they did not include high-risk patients or report adverse hemodynamic outcomes. Future studies are required to address these limitations.
This comparative-effectiveness study uses data from 2 clinical trials to evaluate whether the use of gabapentin for pain management is associated with less opioid use and feeding tube placement among adult patients with head and neck cancer receiving chemoradiotherapy.
PURPOSE: This review was designed to compile the currently available evidence on the prophylactic use of gabapentin in the head and neck cancer patient population. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted of PubMed, Web of Science, and Google Scholar to identify articles related to the use of prophylactic gabapentin in patients undergoing head and neck cancer therapy. Candidate studies were screened for inclusion and a subsequent bias assessment was conducted by multiple reviewers. Meta-analysis was conducted in cases in which the studies used compatible outcome measures. RESULTS: Ten studies were identified that met the inclusion criteria and were assessed for bias. Among the four small studies that examined pain prevention, 2 were positive and 2 were inconclusive. Three of the four studies examiniRDng opioid use noted less need for opioids in the treatment arm. Meta-analysis of the pertinent studies showed no difference in feeding tube placement (RD = 0.64%, 95%CI: (- 25.8%, 27.1%), p = 0.962) but substantially less weight loss among those in the treatment arm (p = 0.047). CONCLUSION: Prophylactic gabapentin appears to be a promising treatment option for preventing pain, reducing opioids, and reducing weight loss in patients undergoing head and neck cancer therapy. However, the studies on the treatment to date are small and several have a substantial risk of bias.
BACKGROUND: Despite gabapentin's misuse and abuse potential and associated adverse events, few algorithms are available to detect gabapentin misuse and/or abuse in claims data. This study aims to develop an algorithm to identify gabapentin misuse and/or abuse in administrative claims data. METHODS: We developed an algorithm to identify gabapentin misuse and/or abuse over a 12-month period based on input from 21 clinical experts. We implemented the algorithm among 334,128 patients with at least one dispensed prescription of gabapentin between December 1, 2017 and December 1, 2018 in the IBM(R) MarketScan(R) Research Databases. We described the characteristics of patients who potentially misused and/or abused gabapentin and assessed factors associated with misuse and/or abuse using logistic regression. RESULTS: The algorithm identified 17.6% of patients with gabapentin use who potentially misused and/or abused gabapentin. Factors associated with potential gabapentin misuse and/or abuse included men (adjusted odds ratio (aOR): 1.08; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.06-1.10), comorbid conditions (e.g., drug and alcohol dependence (aOR: 1.31; 95% CI: 1.24-1.39); bipolar disorder (aOR: 1.34; 95% CI: 1.27-1.41)), and medication use (e.g., opioids (aOR: 1.23; 95% CI: 1.20-1.26), muscle relaxants (aOR: 1.24; 95% CI: 1.21-1.27), or serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (aOR: 1.33; 95% CI: 1.29-1.36)). CONCLUSIONS: Approximately one in six patients with gabapentin use potentially misused and/or abused gabapentin in a large commercial claims database. Multiple comorbidities and drug use were associated with gabapentin misuse and/or abuse. Monitoring requirements and individualized safety measures should be put in place for patients at elevated risks of gabapentin misuse and/or abuse.
BACKGROUND: Gabapentin is an antiepileptic medication with evidence of benefit in alcohol use disorder patients. The mechanism of action of gabapentin may also benefit patients suffering from acute alcohol withdrawal syndrome (AWS). METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted to examine if gabapentin can effectively replace/reduce the use of benzodiazepines for the treatment of acute alcohol withdrawal symptoms in hospitalized patients. Time to alcohol withdrawal symptom resolution, amount of benzodiazepines administered, rate of resolution of alcohol withdrawal symptoms, serious withdrawal-related complications, and hospital length of stay (LOS) were examined. RESULTS: Eight retrospective studies (n = 2030) were included in this meta-analysis. There were no studies that examined study outcomes for patients who received only gabapentin and no benzodiazepines; in all studies, gabapentin-treated patients may have received benzodiazepines prior to gabapentin. There were no significant differences between gabapentin-treated and benzodiazepine-treated groups in time to symptom resolution, amount benzodiazepines administered, withdrawal-related complications, or LOS. There was a significant difference in the rate of symptom resolution favoring gabapentin-treated patients (p = 0.05); however, this analysis included only one study. Subgroup analyses of severe AWS patients revealed a significant decrease in LOS (p = 0.04) and a decrease in amount of benzodiazepines administered (p = 0.02) in gabapentin-treated patients, but these analyses included only one study. Subgroup analysis of patients receiving only gabapentin without benzodiazepines found a significantly decreased LOS in the gabapentin group compared to the benzodiazepine group (p < 0.001), but this analysis included only two studies. CONCLUSIONS: There is insufficient evidence to support the widespread use of gabapentin to treat inpatients suffering AWS. All studies included in this meta-analysis are retrospective with high risk of confounding. Well-designed, randomized, controlled studies of gabapentin to treat patients with AWS are required.
Gabapentin is prescribed for pain and is perceived as safe generally. However, gabapentin can cause respiratory depression, exacerbated by concomitant central nervous system depressants (e.g., opioids), a concern for vulnerable populations. We compared mortality rates among new users of either gabapentin or duloxetine with or without concurrent opioids in the 20% Medicare sample. We conducted a new-user design retrospective cohort study, in Medicare enrollees ages 65-89 years with noncancer chronic pain and no severe illness who filled prescriptions between 2015 and 2018 for gabapentin (n = 233,060) or duloxetine (n = 34,009). Daily opioid doses, estimated in morphine milligram equivalents (MMEs), were classified into none, low (0 < MME < 50), and high (>/= 50 MME), based on Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommendations. The outcomes were all-cause mortality (primary) and out-of-hospital mortality (secondary). We used inverse probability of treatment weighting to adjust for differences between gabapentin and duloxetine users. During 116,707 person-years of follow-up, 1,379 patients died. All-cause mortality rate in gabapentin users was 12.16 per 1,000 person-years vs. 9.94 per 1,000 in duloxetine users. Risks were similar for users with no concurrent opioids (adjusted hazard ratio (aHR) = 1.03, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.80-1.31) or low-dose daily opioids (aHR = 1.06, 95% CI: 0.63-1.76). However, gabapentin users receiving concurrent high-dose daily opioids had an increased rate of all-cause mortality compared with duloxetine users on high-dose opioids (aHR = 2.03, 95% CI: 1.19-3.46). Out-of-hospital mortality yielded similar results. In this retrospective cohort study of Medicare beneficiaries, concurrent use of high-dose opioids and gabapentin was associated with a higher all-cause mortality risk than that for concurrent use of high-dose opioids and duloxetine.
PURPOSE: Gabapentin misuse is on the rise and has forced many US states to mobilize policies to address this public health concern. The purpose of this manuscript is to update state-level gabapentin misuse-related policies in the US through September 1, 2021, discuss the benefits and risks of current measures, and highlight gaps in national response. METHODS: Identification of state and federal district policy changes and deliberations related to gabapentin were searched via internet for all 50 states and 1 federal district (n = 51). Only results from state regulatory bodies, such as the board of pharmacy, or state legislative bodies, such as the senate, were considered for inclusion. RESULTS: Results showed that 22 states and federal districts (43.1%) tightened regulation, while another 2 (3.9%) are considering doing so. Of the 22 states and federal districts with policy changes, 15 (68.2%) enrolled gabapentin into their prescription drug monitoring program, while 7 (31.8%) reclassified gabapentin as a Schedule V controlled substance (C-V). CONCLUSION: Absent of federal guidance surrounding gabapentin misuse, the onus has fallen on individual states; thus, approaches have ranged from no intervention to reclassification as a C-V. These measures aim to reduce medication supply but fall short of addressing patient outcomes and reducing harm. Therefore, harm reduction-informed public health policies must be implemented to positively impact patient outcomes and enhance safety.
Toxicity from gabapentin and pregabalin overdose is commonly encountered. Treatment is supportive, and the use of extracorporeal treatments (ECTRs) is controversial. The EXTRIP workgroup conducted systematic reviews of the literature and summarized findings following published methods. Thirty-three articles (30 patient reports and 3 pharmacokinetic studies) met the inclusion criteria. High gabapentinoid extracorporeal clearance (>150mL/min) and short elimination half-life (<5 hours) were reported with hemodialysis. The workgroup assessed gabapentin and pregabalin as "dialyzable" for patients with decreased kidney function (quality of the evidence grade as A and B, respectively). Limited clinical data were available (24 patients with gabapentin toxicity and 7 with pregabalin toxicity received ECTR). Severe toxicity, mortality, and sequelae were rare in cases receiving ECTR and in historical controls receiving standard care alone. No clear clinical benefit from ECTR could be identified although major knowledge gaps were acknowledged, as well as costs and harms of ECTR. The EXTRIP workgroup suggests against performing ECTR in addition to standard care rather than standard care alone (weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence) for gabapentinoid poisoning in patients with normal kidney function. If decreased kidney function and coma requiring mechanical ventilation are present, the workgroup suggests performing ECTR in addition to standard care (weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Gabapentin is a gamma-aminobutyric acid analog formally indicated for the treatment of epilepsy and neuropathic pain that is gaining increased popularity. Gabapentin has been historically considered a safe medication, including during pregnancy and lactation, with low reported concerns for misuse and use disorders. However, new empirical efforts are revealing concerns regarding the safety of widespread gabapentin use, particularly in pregnancy and for individuals with a propensity toward substance misuse. The Food and Drug Administration's full prescribing information report on gabapentin provides concerning preclinical data and then states that gabapentin is potentially "developmentally toxic" and has an unknown risk of birth impacts. Concerns have also been raised surrounding in utero exposure to gabapentin due to the onset and presentation of atypical and/or difficult to control withdrawal signs and symptoms in neonates, including those dually exposed to opioids, as well as neonatal exposure to gabapentin via breastmilk. Moreover, nonprescribed gabapentin use has become an increasing problem, with opioid use disorder being the greatest risk factor for such misuse. This article summarizes the current literature regarding gabapentin use during pregnancy and related prenatal and neonatal exposure outcomes with special consideration for interactions between gabapentin and opioid use. Taken together, the current literature suggests that gabapentin use should be considered with caution during pregnancy and during the post-partum period. Well-controlled, prospective research studies are needed to determine the extent of the risks and benefits of prescribed and nonprescribed gabapentin exposure to pregnant people and their neonates.
IMPORTANCE: Patients undergoing spine surgery often experience severe pain. The optimal dosage of pregabalin and gabapentin for pain control and safety in these patients has not been well established. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the associations of pain, opioid consumption, and adverse events with different dosages of pregabalin and gabapentin in patients undergoing spine surgery. DATA SOURCES: PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, Web of Science, Cochrane library, and Scopus databases were searched for articles until August 7, 2021. STUDY SELECTION: Randomized clinical trials conducted among patients who received pregabalin or gabapentin while undergoing spine surgery were included. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Two investigators independently performed data extraction following the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses) reporting guideline. The network meta-analysis was conducted from August 2022 to February 2023 using a random-effects model. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was pain intensity measured using the Visual Analog Scale (VAS), and secondary outcomes included opioid consumption and adverse events. RESULTS: Twenty-seven randomized clinical trials with 1861 patients (median age, 45.99 years [range, 20.00-70.00 years]; 759 women [40.8%]) were included in the systematic review and network meta-analysis. Compared with placebo, the VAS pain score was lowest with gabapentin 900 mg per day, followed by gabapentin 1200 mg per day, gabapentin 600 mg per day, gabapentin 300 mg per day, pregabalin 300 mg per day, pregabalin 150 mg per day, and pregabalin 75 mg per day. Additionally, gabapentin 900 mg per day was found to be associated with the lowest opioid consumption among all dosages of gabapentin and pregabalin, with a mean difference of -22.07% (95% CI, -33.22% to -10.92%) for the surface under the cumulative ranking curve compared with placebo. There was no statistically significant difference in adverse events (nausea, vomiting, and dizziness) among all treatments. No substantial inconsistency between direct and indirect evidence was detected for all outcomes. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These findings suggest that gabapentin 900 mg per day before spine surgery is associated with the lowest VAS pain score among all dosages. In addition, no differences in adverse events were noted among all treatments.
