The pharmacokinetic parameters, safety, and tolerability of OptiMARK (gadoversetamide injection), a gadolinium-based magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent, were evaluated in 163 subjects with either central nervous system (CNS) or liver pathology with and without renal insufficiency, for which a contrast-enhanced MRI was indicated. A multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group design was used in which subjects received 0.1, 0.3, or 0.5 mmol/kg of OptiMARK or placebo intravenously. Samples were analyzed for total gadolinium by inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometry. Gadolinium pharmacokinetics were affected by renal impairment: area under the curve, half-life, and steady-state distribution volume significantly increased with declining renal function, while total body clearance decreased. In subjects with normal renal function, neither age, gender, nor liver versus CNS pathology altered gadolinium pharmacokinetics. No clinically significant changes from baseline were noted in vital signs, laboratory measures, electrocardiograms, or physical examinations. OptiMARK is safe and well-tolerated following a single intravenous injection in subjects with either liver or CNS pathology despite a prolonged elimination half-life in subjects with renal impairment.
BACKGROUND: The identification and assessment of myocardial infarction (MI) are important for therapeutic and prognostic purposes, yet current recommended diagnostic strategies have significant limitations. We prospectively tested the performance of delayed-enhancement magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium-based contrast for the detection of MI in an international, multicenter trial. METHODS AND RESULTS: Patients with their first MI were enrolled in an acute (< or = 16 days after MI; n=282) or chronic (17 days to 6 months; n=284) arm and then randomized to 1 of 4 doses of gadoversetamide: 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, or 0.3 mmol/kg. Standard delayed-enhancement MRI was performed before contrast (control) and 10 and 30 minutes after gadoversetamide. For blinded analysis, precontrast and postcontrast MRIs were randomized and then scored for enhanced regions by 3 independent readers not associated with the study. The infarct-related artery perfusion territory was scored from x-ray angiograms separately. In total, 566 scans were performed in 26 centers using commercially available scanners from all major US/European vendors. All scans were included in the analysis. The sensitivity of MRI for detecting MI increased with rising dose of gadoversetamide (P<0.0001), reaching 99% (acute) and 94% (chronic) after contrast compared with 11% before contrast. Likewise, the accuracy of MRI for identifying MI location (compared with infarct-related artery perfusion territory) increased with rising dose of gadoversetamide (P<0.0001), reaching 99% (acute) and 91% (chronic) after contrast compared with 9% before contrast. For gadoversetamide doses > or = 0.2 mmol/kg, 10- and 30-minute images provided equal performance, and peak creatine kinase-MB levels correlated with MRI infarct size (P<0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: Gadoversetamide-enhanced MRI using doses of > or = 0.2 mmol/kg is effective in the detection and assessment of both acute and chronic MI. This study represents the first multicenter trial designed to evaluate an imaging approach for detecting MI.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of OptiMARK (gadoversetamide injection) compared with Magnevist (gadopentetate dimeglumine) in hepatic MRI of patients with suspected liver pathology. A Phase III, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, parallel group study was performed in adults with suspected liver pathology. All patients underwent contrast-enhanced computed tomography within 3 weeks prior to magnetic resonance scanning. Ninety-nine patients received OptiMARK, and 94 patients received Magnevist at a dose of 0.1 mmol/kg. Precontrast T1- and T2-weighted spin-echo imaging and T1-weighted gradient-echo imaging were performed, followed by T1-weighted gradient-echo imaging at 15-20 seconds, 1 minute, and 5 minutes after intravenous contrast injection. Three primary efficacy endpoints (confidence in lesion diagnosis, level of conspicuity, and lesion border delineation) were evaluated on the precontrast image set and compared with the pre plus postcontrast image set. Vital signs, physical examination, electrocardiograms (ECGs), and laboratory parameters (chemistry, hematology, and urinalysis) were measured at various time points. Adverse events were recorded. The study design and statistical analyses were chosen to demonstrate presumed equivalence of OptiMARK and Magnevist. There were no statistically significant differences in efficacy between OptiMARK and Magnevist as assessed by either blinded readers or the on-site principal investigators. No serious or unexpected adverse events were noted. Of the 193 patients receiving contrast media, 82 experienced a total of 154 adverse events. Thirty-three (21.4%) of these 154 adverse events were felt by the on-site investigators to be probably related to either study agent: 15 events in 9 patients in the OptiMARK group, and 18 events in 13 patients in the Magnevist group. Headache was the most common adverse event, occurring in 10.1% of the OptiMARK patients and 12.8% of the Magnevist patients. No clinically relevant trends were observed in any laboratory parameter or ECG findings in either treatment group. The results demonstrate the safety, efficacy, and equivalence of OptiMARK and Magnevist at a dose of 0.1 mmol/kg in hepatic magnetic resonance imaging of patients with suspected liver pathology.
Gadobutrol and gadoversetamide are gadolinium-based contrast agents (GBCAs) widely used during magnetic resonance imaging examination. In this study, the genotoxicity of two GBCAs, gadobutrol and gadoversetamide, was investigated by using different endpoints: chromosome aberration (CAs), sister chromatid exchange (SCEs), and micronucleus (MNi). Human peripheral lymphocytes (PBLs) were treated with five concentrations (7 000, 14 000, 28 000, 56 000, and 112 000 mug/mL) of both agents. While a few concentrations of gadobutrol significantly increased abnormal cell frequency and CA/Cell, nearly all the concentrations of gadoversetamide significantly elevated the same aberrations. Similarly, the effect of gadoversetamide on the formation of SCEs was higher than those of gadobutrol. Only one concentration of gadoversetamide significantly increased MN% but no gadobutrol. The comet assay was applied for the only gadobutrol which induced a significant increase in tail intensity at the highest concentration only. On the other hand, significantly decreased mitotic index (MI) was observed following both substances, again gadoversetamide was slightly higher than those of the gadobutrol. The results revealed that both the contrast agents are likely to induce genotoxic risk in PBLs. However, different concentrations and treatment periods should be examined in vitro and specifically in vivo with different test systems for the safer usage of these contrast agents.
OBJECTIVE: The safety and efficacy of gadoversetamide injection (OptiMARK) was examined in pediatric patients referred for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the central nervous system (CNS). RESEARCH AND DESIGN METHODS: This was an open-label, multicenter study in patients aged between 2 and 18 years scheduled for a contrast-enhanced MRI study. Patients received a single injection of gadoversetamide (0.1 mmol/kg). Safety of gadoversetamide was evaluated by physical examinations and monitoring of adverse events, laboratory values, vital signs, and electrocardiogram readings before and after drug administration. Efficacy was assessed by three independent, blinded readers for confidence in diagnosis and level of conspicuity for lesion visualization on precontrast and postcontrast images. The diagnostic accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of lesion detection were determined for the precontrast images, the postcontrast images, and the precontrast and postcontrast images read together. RESULTS: No drug-related moderate or serious adverse events were observed in this study, according to site investigators. A total of four adverse events in four of 100 patients (4%) were deemed likely related to gadoversetamide injection by the site investigators. All were mild in severity and not clinically significant. The most common adverse events, regardless of relationship to study drug, were injection-site reactions and a small prolongation of the QT interval. The administration of gadoversetamide significantly increased the level of lesion conspicuity and diagnostic confidence (p < 0.05). Compared with the nonenhanced image, gadoversetamide significantly increased the accuracy and sensitivity of lesion detection (p < 0.05). Limitations of the study included a lack of physiological measurements after sedation and prior to contrast administration, a single dose of gadoversetamide administered (0.1 mmol/kg) and patients younger than 2 years of age were excluded. CONCLUSION: The administration of gadoversetamide injection (0.1 mmol/kg) was safe, well tolerated and produced clinically appropriate contrast enhancement for MRI of the CNS in the pediatric population.
OBJECTIVE: Gadolinium is administered as a contrast agent in MRI procedures. Two gadolinium-based contrast agents, gadodiamide and gadoversetamide, interfere with colorimetric total serum calcium methods. The purpose of this prospective observational study was to examine the incidence of calcium interference after gadoversetamide procedures, associated clinical outcomes, and costs 20 months after implementation of quality assurance and physician education programs. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Records of patients who received gadoversetamide from June 24, 2006, to October 7, 2006, were reviewed to determine if a routine calcium test had been performed after the injection. Calcium values were repeated with an alternate method that is less susceptible to gadoversetamide interference. If the difference was > or = 2.0 mg/dL or if the initial test value was < or = 7.0 mg/dL, patient charts were reviewed for any related treatment. Costs associated with this algorithm were tracked. RESULTS: The initial calcium test was performed after gadoversetamide in 766 of 3,439 instances. The alternate test was performed in 633 of 766. One hundred twenty-five of 633 (20%) showed a difference in calcium values that was > or = 0.7 mg/dL, with 16 showing differences of > or = 1.6 mg/dL. Chart review for 56 instances revealed that calcium supplements were administered in 22 of 56 around the time of gadoversetamide injection. However, none appeared to be related to the spurious hypocalcemia. The total additional cost (reagent and technologist) for following this algorithm for just over 3 months was $6,807. CONCLUSION: Approximately 20% of patients receiving gadoversetamide exhibited spurious hypocalcemia. No patients were identified who received inappropriate calcium because of this interference. This may be attributable to the quality assurance and physician education programs.
RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVE: This clinical trial examined the pharmacokinetics of gadoversetamide, a magnetic resonance imaging contrast agent, in normal pediatric subjects. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventeen healthy pediatric subjects received a single intravenous injection of gadoversetamide (0.1 mmol/kg, 0.2 mL/kg). Sixteen subjects that were evaluable for pharmacokinetic analysis fell into 2 stratified age groups: 2 years to <5 years and 5 years to <18 years of age. Serum samples were analyzed for total gadolinium as a measure of gadoversetamide concentration. RESULTS: Statistical analysis demonstrated significant (P < 0.05) age-related trends in the mean elimination half-life (t 1/2) of gadolinium with the older group having a slightly longer t 1/2 (1.39 hours) than the younger group (1.19 hours). No age-related changes occurred in volume of distribution or total body clearance, when normalized to body weight or body surface area. CONCLUSIONS: Based on this preliminary pharmacokinetic assessment, no adjustment from the approved adult gadoversetamide dose of 0.1 mmol/kg should be necessary for children aged 2 or older.
OBJECTIVE: The pharmacokinetics of gadoversetamide were examined in pediatric patients scheduled to undergo contrast-enhanced MRI of the central nervous system. MATERIALS AND METHODS: One hundred patients received an intravenous injection of gadoversetamide at a dose of 0.1 mmol/kg for a contrast-enhanced MRI procedure. A subpopulation of 30 patients were enrolled to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of gadoversetamide in patients 2-11 and 12-18 years of age. Serial blood and urine samples were collected before and after the administration of gadoversetamide. RESULTS: The terminal half-life, initial concentration and area under the curve assessments for gadoversetamide showed no significant (P>.05) differences between the age groups or the sexes. Although no sex-related differences occurred in the volume of distribution or clearance, significant (P<.05) age-related differences were found, but once corrected for body mass or surface area the differences were no longer significant. CONCLUSIONS: The pharmacokinetic behavior of gadoversetamide was not significantly altered by differences in age or sex in pediatric patients from 2 to 18 years of age. Although significant differences in volumes of distribution, and clearance occurred between the age groups, these differences appeared to depend on body size rather than on age in pediatric patients between 2 and 18 years of age.
PURPOSE: To assess the safety data from two large, multicenter, phase 2 trials on the use of gadoversetamide (OptiMARK, Tyco Healthcare/Mallinckrodt, St. Louis, MO) as a contrast agent in delayed hyperenhancement magnetic resonance imaging (DE-MRI) in patients with acute and chronic myocardial infarction (MI). MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study population from both trials comprised 577 patients who were randomly assigned to one of four dose groups (0.05, 0.1, 0.2, or 0.3 mmol/kg) before undergoing DE-MRI. Safety evaluations included physical and electrocardiographic (ECG) examinations. Vital signs, laboratory values, adverse events (AE), and serious adverse events (SAE) were monitored before and after contrast administration. RESULTS: Of the 577 patients who received gadoversetamide, 124 (21.5%) reported a total of 164 AEs; most were mild (139 AEs; 84.8%) or moderate (25 AEs; 15.2%). ECG-related changes were the most frequent AE. Site investigators judged only eight AEs as likely related to gadoversetamide and only two of the eight as clinically relevant. Further evaluation suggested neither AE was related to gadoversetamide. Two SAEs were reported, but none was judged related to gadoversetamide by the site investigators. CONCLUSION: Gadoversetamide is safe for use in patients with acute or chronic MI up to a dose of 0.3 mmol/kg.
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) is a debilitating fibrosing disorder of patients with kidney disease that is associated with gadolinium-based contrast exposure. Most cases are linked to gadodiamide. Gadoversetamide, an agent with chelate characteristics similar to gadodiamide, has rarely been described to cause NSF. With the exception of normalization of kidney function, there are no consistently effective therapies for patients with NSF. We describe 3 cases of NSF in patients with end-stage renal disease after gadolinium-based contrast exposure. Two patients received gadoversetamide and the third received gadodiamide. All 3 patients were treated early in their disease course with intravenous sodium thiosulfate and responded with improved skin changes and joint mobility.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the safety of OptiMARK (gadoversetamide injection) administered via power injector. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study population included 144 healthy volunteers aged 18 years or older randomly assigned to one of seven treatment groups (N = 20/group). The safety assessment was based on changes in physical examination, vital signs, electrocardiograms (ECGs), standard clinical laboratory tests, and adverse events (AEs) through a 24-hour postinjection period. RESULTS: OptiMARK caused no serious AEs or unexpected changes in physical examinations or laboratory parameters. The changes observed in vital signs and ECG intervals did not vary with changes in injection rate and were not significantly (P < 0.05) different from those elicited by saline administration at the same rates. CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated the safety of OptiMARK when administered via a power injector at rates of 2, 4, and 6 mL/second.
