Ganciclovir and valganciclovir are first choice drugs for the prevention and treatment of cytomegalovirus infection and disease in solid organ and stem cell transplant recipients. Only a few studies on the pharmacokinetics and exposure/efficacy or exposure/safety relationships of ganciclovir and valganciclovir in transplant recipients have been published so far, and there are still controversies about the exposure parameter to use for therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM). We performed an extensive literature review of the clinical pharmacokinetics data, the exposure/effect relationships in terms of efficacy and safety, and the available tools for valganciclovir and ganciclovir TDM in adults and pediatrics transplant recipients. The pharmacokinetics of ganciclovir and valganciclovir is well described in adults and children, and a high interindividual variability is commonly observed. In contrast, the drug pharmacodynamics has been poorly described in adults and barely in children. The average 24-hour area under the concentration-time curve (AUC(0-24h) ) seems to be the best predictor of efficacy and toxicity. The benefit of TDM remains controversial in adult patients but should be considered in children due to higher interindividual variability and lower probability of target attainment. Several bayesian estimators based on limited sampling strategies have been developed with this aim and may be used in clinical practice for the AUC-based individual dose adjustment of ganciclovir and valganciclovir.
Liver and intestinal transplant recipients at the University of Miami receive an intensive regimen of cytomegalovirus (CMV) prophylactic therapy consisting of a combination of CMV immune globulin intravenous (CMV-IGIV, CytoGam) and ganciclovir. The 5-year experience with this regimen in liver transplant patients showed effective CMV prophylaxis in this patient population. The importance of an effective prophylactic strategy was underscored by higher observed rates of chronic rejection and post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) in CMV-infected patients. The use of CMV-positive donors for intestinal transplants did not increase the incidence of CMV disease. Intestinal transplant recipients had improved survival rates, reflecting an aggressive policy of monitoring, immunosuppression, and CytoGam plus ganciclovir prophylaxis.
INTRODUCTION: Immunosuppressant drugs are increasingly being used in the reproductive years. Theoretically, such medications could affect fetal health either through changes in the sperm DNA or through fetal exposure caused by a presence in the seminal fluid. This systematic overview summarizes existing literature on the spermatotoxic and genotoxic potentials of methotrexate (MTX), a drug widely used to treat rheumatic and dermatologic diseases, and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), which alone or supplemented with ganciclovir (GCV) may be crucial for the survival of organ transplants. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The systematic overview was performed in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines: A systematic literature search of the MEDLINE and Embase databases was done using a combination of relevant terms to search for studies on spermatotoxic or genotoxic changes related to treatment with MTX, GCV or MMF. The search was restricted to English language literature, and to in vivo animal studies (mammalian species) and clinical human studies. RESULTS: A total of 102 studies were identified, hereof 25 human and 77 animal studies. For MTX, human studies of immunosuppressive dosages show transient effect on sperm quality parameters, which return to reference values within 3 months. No human studies have investigated the sperm DNA damaging effect of MTX, but in other organs the genotoxic effects of immunosuppressive doses of MTX are fluctuating. In animals, immunosuppressive and cytotoxic doses of MTX adversely affect sperm quality parameters and show widespread genotoxic damages in various organs. Cytotoxic doses transiently change the DNA material in all cell stages of spermatogenesis in rodents. For GCV and MMF, data are limited and the results are indeterminate, for which reason spermatotoxic and genotoxic potentials cannot be excluded. CONCLUSIONS: Data from human and animal studies indicate transient spermatotoxic and genotoxic potentials of immunosuppressive and cytotoxic doses of MTX. There are a limited number of studies investigating GCV and MMF.
Fulminant hepatitis of unknown origin remain a significant cause of mortality, for which liver transplantation is often considered as the only therapeutic option. In retrospective studies, human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) infections have been associated with such diseases, but the diagnosis of HHV-6 infection of the liver is rarely established during the acute phase of liver failure. Using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), we diagnosed two cases of severe acute liver failure (ALF) related to HHV-6 occurring in immunocompetent young adults. Both cases had a favourable outcome, one after valganciclovir therapy, one after liver transplantation associated with ganciclovir. Viral origin was evidenced in each case by the detection of high amounts of HHV-6 DNA in liver tissue by the PCR assay. The decrease of intrahepatic viral load after therapeutic intervention was also monitored by quantitative PCR and paralleled in the two cases the clinical improvement. Diagnosis of HHV-6 infection must be systematically evoked in case of unexplained ALF, since it might lead to specific therapeutic interventions, in addition of liver transplantation.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Dose banding is a strategy to optimize processing without reducing patient safety. Prescribed doses are rounded up or down to predetermined standard doses. Although it has been mostly used in chemotherapy, other drugs are suitable for this strategy, such as the antiviral ganciclovir. The aim of this work is to assess the safety and efficiency of a dose-rounding system for intravenous ganciclovir. METHODS: Dose bands were established for a maximum of 10% variation from the individualized dose. The number of annual preparations that expired before use and the number of ganciclovir vials saved were documented as indicators of efficiency. Toxicity was assessed comparing haematological parameters before and after ganciclovir treatment in a sample of patients who received doses above the theoretical dose (n = 121) and in the rest of the cohort (n = 129). RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Five ganciclovir standard doses were established. It was shown that the bulk of the preparations (83.7%) had a maximum variation between the exact dose prescribed and the adjusted dose of +/-10%. Three years after its implementation, a mean of 2848 annual preparations were compounded. The average percentage of annual expired preparations was lower than 1% of the total compounded doses, and the dose-rounding system allowed for saving 699 manufactured ganciclovir vials annually. There was no significant difference between haemoglobin and leucocyte levels measured before and after ganciclovir treatment in both groups. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: Ganciclovir dose banding allows for efficient management of preparations without an increased risk of acute haematological side effects.
AIMS: Ganciclovir (GCV) and its prodrug valganciclovir (VGCV) are first-line agents to prevent and treat cytomegalovirus in transplant recipients. There is high pharmacokinetic (PK) interindividual variability and PK data are scarce, especially in paediatric stem cell transplant (SCT) recipients. We sought to determine the optimal GCV and VGCV dosing in transplanted children. METHODS: We conducted a single-centre retrospective population PK (POPPK) study of IV GCV and enteral VGCV in paediatric solid organ transplant (SOT) and SCT recipients. We included children who were transplanted and had available plasma GCV concentrations, done per standard of care. POPPK analysis was performed using a nonlinear mixed effects modelling approach with NONMEM. Optimal dosing was determined based on the achievement of the surrogate efficacy target: GCV 24 h area under the concentration-time curve (AUC(0-24h) ) of 40-60 mg.h.L(-1) . RESULTS: Fifty children with a median [range] age of 7.5 years [0.5-17.4] contributed 580 PK samples. A two-compartment model with first-order absorption with a lag time and first-order elimination fit the data well. Creatinine clearance and body weight (WT) were significant covariates for GCV clearance (CL); and WT for the volumes of distribution. IV GCV 15-20 mg.kg(-1) .day(-1) divided every 12 hours achieved the highest probability of target achievement (PTA) (33.0-33.8%). Enteral VGCV 30 and 40 mg.kg(-1) .day(-1) divided every 12 hours in children 0-<6 years, and 6-18 years, respectively, achieved the highest PTA (29.1-33.0%). CONCLUSION: This is the first POPPK model developed in children with either SOT or SCT. Concentration target achievement was low, suggesting a potential benefit for therapeutic drug monitoring to ensure optimal exposure.
Valganciclovir, the ganciclovir prodrug, is an antiviral agent used to prevent cytomegalovirus infection in renal transplant children. Therapeutic drug monitoring is still necessary to ensure optimal therapeutic area under the concentration-time curve from 0 to 24 h (AUC(0-24)) of 40 to 60 mug.h/mL since valganciclovir presents a high pharmacokinetic variability. To calculate ganciclovir AUC(0-24) with the trapezoidal method, 7 samples are needed. The objective of this study was to develop and validate a reliable and clinically applicable limited sampling strategy (LSS) for individualizing valganciclovir dose in renal transplant children. Rich pharmacokinetic data from ganciclovir plasmatic dosages measured in renal transplant children who received valganciclovir to prevent cytomegalovirus infection at Robert Debre University Hospital were collected retrospectively. Ganciclovir AUC(0-24)s were calculated using the trapezoidal method. The LSS was developed using a multilinear regression approach to predict AUC(0-24). The patients included were divided into two groups for model development (50 patients) and validation (30 patients). A total of 80 patients were included between February 2005 and November 2018. Multilinear regression models were developed on 50 pharmacokinetic profiles (50 patients) and validated with an independent group of 43 pharmacokinetic profiles (30 patients). Regressions based on samples collected at T1h-T4h-T8h, T2h-T4h-T8h, or T1h-T2h-T8h presented the best AUC(0-24) predictive performances with an average difference between reference and predicted AUC(0-24) of -0.27, 0.34, and -0.40 mug.h/mL, respectively. In conclusion, valganciclovir dosage adaptation was required in children to achieve the target AUC(0-24). Three LSS models using three pharmacokinetic blood samples instead of seven will be useful for individualizing valganciclovir prophylaxis in renal transplant children.
Estimation of the continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF) clearance (CL(CHDF)) of ganciclovir (GCV) is crucial for achieving efficient treatment outcomes. Here, we aimed to clarify the contribution of diafiltration, adsorption, and hematocrit level to the CL(CHDF) of GCV in an in vitro CHDF model using three membranes: polyacrylonitrile and sodium methallyl sulfonate copolymer coated with polyethylenimine (AN69ST); polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA); and polysulfone (PS). In vitro CHDF was performed with effluent flow rates (Qe) of 800, 1500, and 3000 mL/h. The initial GCV concentration was 10 microg/mL while that of human serum albumin (HSA) was 0 or 5 g/dL. The CL(CHDF), diafiltration rates, and adsorption rates were calculated. The whole blood-to-plasma ratio (R) of GCV for a hematocrit of 0.1 to 0.5 was determined using blood samples with 0.5 to 100 microg/mL of GCV. The in vitro CHDF experiment using AN69ST, PMMA, and PS membranes showed that the total CL(CHDF) values were almost the same as the Qe and not influenced by the HSA concentration. The diafiltration rate exceeded 88.1 +/- 2.8% while the adsorption rate was lower than 9.4 +/- 9.4% in all conditions. The R value was 1.89 +/- 0.11 and was similar at all hematocrit levels and GCV concentrations. In conclusion, diafiltration mainly contributes to the CL(CHDF) of GCV, rather than adsorption. Hematocrit levels might not affect the relationship between the plasma and blood CL(CHDF) of GCV, and the CL(CHDF) of GCV can be estimated from the Qe and R, at least in vitro.
Ganciclovir is indicated for curative or preventive treatment of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections. This study aimed to characterize ganciclovir pharmacokinetics, following intravenous ganciclovir and oral valganciclovir administration, to optimize dosing schemes. All children aged <18 years receiving ganciclovir or valganciclovir were included in this study. Pharmacokinetics were described using nonlinear mixed-effect modeling. Monte Carlo simulations were used to optimize the dosing regimen to maintain the area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) in the preventive or therapeutic target. Among the 105 children (374 concentration-time observations) included, 78 received intravenous (i.v.) ganciclovir, 19 received oral valganciclovir, and 6 received both drugs. A two-compartment model with first-order absorption for valganciclovir and first-order elimination best described the data. An allometric model was used to describe the bodyweight (BW) effect. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and medical status of critically ill children were significantly associated with ganciclovir elimination. Recommended doses were adapted for prophylactic treatment. To obtain a therapeutic exposure, doses should be increased to 40 mg/kg of body weight/day oral or 15 to 20 mg/kg/day i.v. in children with normal eGFR and to 56 mg/kg/day oral or 20 to 25 mg/kg/day i.v. in children with augmented eGFR. These doses should be prospectively confirmed, and therapeutic drug monitoring could be used to refine them individually. (This study has been registered at ClinicalTrials.gov under identifier NCT02539407.).
BACKGROUND: There is a lack of data regarding suitable dosage when administering intravenous ganciclovir (GCV) or oral valganciclovir (valGCV) to preterm and low birthweight infants with cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease. METHODS: Data were collected for infants born before 32 weeks gestation and/or weighing less than 1.8 kg treated for CMV disease with GCV or valGCV between 2016 and 2023. RESULTS: Twenty-four infants (58% males and 48% Asian ethnicity) with a median gestation of 31 weeks [interquartile range (IQR): 26.6-36.1], median weight of 950 g (IQR: 470-1692) and median age of 45 days (IQR: 6-84) at initiation of treatment were included. Seventeen infants were treated for symptomatic postnatal CMV and 7 for symptomatic congenital CMV. Most infants receiving GCV had 6 mg/kg twice daily dosing and most receiving valGCV had 16 mg/kg twice daily dosing. Fourteen infants had drug concentrations measured with combined geometric mean minimum blood plasma concentration (Cmin) of 2.44 mg/L and maximum blood plasma concentration of 7.98 mg/L for doses of 6 mg/kg GCV and 16 mg/kg valGCV, which is higher compared with term infants. The estimated area under the curve at 12 hours (AUC0-12h) was 54.34 mg x h/L, which doubled the value for term infants in a previous study. Notably, AUC0-12h had an inverse relationship with gestational age and weight. Infants with lower gestation and higher Cmin showed a higher tendency for more than 1 adverse effect. CONCLUSIONS: GCV and valGCV use among preterm and very low birthweight infants with CMV disease resulted in a higher incidence of adverse events, increased AUC0-12h and elevated Cmin compared with term infants. Further pharmacokinetic studies are necessary to determine the ideal dosage in this population.
BAY38-4766 and BAY43-9695 are nonnucleosidic compounds with activities against human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). Two phenotypic assays were used to determine the drug susceptibilities of 36 HCMV clinical isolates to the BAY compounds and ganciclovir. Using either assay, both BAY compounds at a concentration of approximately 1 microM inhibited the replication of all 36 HCMV clinical isolates, including 11 ganciclovir-resistant clinical isolates, by 50%.
Tricyclic (T) analogues of acyclovir (ACV, 1) and ganciclovir (GCV, 2) carrying the 3,9-dihydro-9-oxo-5H-imidazo[1,2-a]purine system [i.e., 6-(4-BrPh)TACV, 5 and 6-(4-BrPh)TGCV, 6] were transformed into 6-[(4'-R2)-4-biphenylyl] derivatives of TACV (7-9) and TGCV (10-12) by Suzuki cross coupling with 4-substituted phenylboronic acids. Compound 11 (R2 = CH2OH) showed a high (approximately 1000) selectivity index against herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) together with advantageous fluorescence properties (emission in visible region, little overlap with absorption and moderate intensity).
Intravenous ganciclovir and oral valganciclovir are effective in the prevention and treatment of pediatric cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection but various dosing regimens are used in medical practice. Population pharmacokinetic (PopPK) model-based simulations were used to propose a new ganciclovir pediatric dosing algorithm for regulatory review and to evaluate the approved valganciclovir pediatric dosing algorithm against published dosing recommendations derived from quantitative approaches. Oral valganciclovir (mg = 7 x body surface area (BSA) x creatinine clearance according to the Schwarz formula (CrCLS) daily) and i.v. ganciclovir (mg = 3 x BSA x CrCLS daily) are effective in reaching ganciclovir target exposure for the prevention of CMV (area under the concentration-time curve (AUC)(0-24) 40-60 mug ∙ hour/mL) in most pediatric patients across the full pediatric age range. In contrast, ganciclovir and valganciclovir dosing based on body weight, as commonly used in medical practice, leads to underexposure, particularly in younger pediatric patients. This example shows that model-based dosing algorithms built on clinical pharmacology and implemented using good modeling practice can prevent underexposure and reduce the risk of treatment failure in pediatric patients.
OBJECTIVES: Ganciclovir is the most widely used treatment for cytomegalovirus infections. However, neutropenia is a frequent associated adverse effect leading to a decrease in the ganciclovir dose or discontinuation of the therapy, thereby favouring viral resistance. In the present study, the objectives were: (i) to describe the pharmacokinetics of blood and intracellular ganciclovir and its metabolites; and (ii) to explore the relationship between exposure to ganciclovir and/or its metabolites and evolution of the neutrophil count under treatment. METHODS: Pharmacokinetic profiles (pre-dose and 1, 2, 3 and 5 h after dosing) of ganciclovir and its metabolites were measured in 22 adult renal transplant patients and further modelled by a non-parametric approach (PMetrics((R))). The relationship between exposure indices to ganciclovir and the slope of the neutrophil count was investigated using multiple linear regression. RESULTS: A four-compartment open model was able to accurately describe ganciclovir and its intracellular forms. A significant association was found between intracellular ganciclovir triphosphate concentrations (AUC0-5) and the decrease in neutrophil count over the first 3 months of treatment (beta= -0.0019 +/- 5 x 10(-4); P < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: In this population of renal transplant patients, the decrease in neutrophil count, used as a surrogate marker of haematological toxicity, was associated with ganciclovir triphosphate accumulation in blood cells. Further studies are needed to test this biomarker as a predictive factor for toxicity.
