Drug-induced myopathy has been reported with use of lovastatin, nicotinic acid, and clofibrate. A particularly severe form, often accompanied by rhabdomyolysis, has been reported with the use of lovastatin and gemfibrozil; however, as far as we know, no case has been documented with use of gemfibrozil alone. Herein, we report the first case (to our knowledge of gemfibrozil-induced myopathy, confirmed by drug rechallenge.
In a controlled clinical trial with a placebo prephase, the comparison of the two lipid-lowering drugs etofibrate and gemfibrozil showed no clinically relevant differences of lipoprotein profile modification in 50 patients with combined hyperlipidaemia. Under both treatments, there was a marked and significant reduction of triglycerides associated with a significant decrease of total cholesterol. In both treatment groups, the percent increase of high density lipoprotein HDL cholesterol was significantly correlated to the pretreatment levels of HDL cholesterol. Tolerance was better under etofibrate with no reported side effects compared to gemfibrozil with two reported cases of gastrointestinal side effects.
The lipid-regulating drug gemfibrozil is a useful medication for reducing high cholesterol and triglycerides in the blood. In addition to oxidation, it undergoes extensive glucuronidation to produce gemfibrozil acyl glucuronide, which is a known mechanism-based inactivator of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C8. Such selective and time-dependent inhibition results in clinically important drug-drug interactions (DDI) with the drugs metabolized by CYP2C8. Similarly, the acyl glucuronide of clopidogrel, a widely used antiplatelet agent, is a potent time-dependent inhibitor of CYP2C8 that demonstrated significant DDI with the substrates of CYP2C8. Current progress in atomic-level understanding mostly involves studying how different drugs bind and undergo oxidation in the active site of CYPs. It is not clear how an acyl glucuronide metabolite of the drug gemfibrozil or clopidogrel interacts in the active site of CYP2C8 and selectively inhibit the enzyme. This mini-review summarizes the current knowledge on some of the important clinical DDI caused by gemfibrozil and clopidogrel due to the inhibition of CYP2C8 by acyl glucuronide metabolites of these drugs. Importantly, it examines recent developments and potential applications of structural biology tools to elucidate the binding and orientation of gemfibrozil acyl glucuronide and clopidogrel acyl glucuronide in the active site near heme that contributes to the inhibition and inactivation of CYP2C8.
Gemfibrozil (GEM), which decreases serum triglycerides and low density lipoprotein, perpetrates drug-drug interactions (DDIs) with several drugs. These DDIs are primarily attributed to the inhibition of drug transporters and metabolic enzymes, particularly cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C8 by the major circulating metabolite gemfibrozil 1-O-beta-glucuronide (GG). Here, we characterized the transporter-mediated hepatic disposition of GEM and GG using sandwich-cultured human hepatocytes (SCHH) and transporter-transfect systems. Significant active uptake was noted in SCHH for the metabolite. GG, but not GEM, showed substrate affinity to organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP) 1B1, 1B3, and 2B1. In SCHH, glucuronidation was characterized affinity constants (Km) of 7.9 and 61.4 muM, and biliary excretion of GG was observed. Furthermore, GG showed active basolateral efflux from preloaded SCHH and ATP-dependent uptake into membrane vesicles overexpressing multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP) 2, MRP3, and MRP4. A mathematical model was developed to estimate hepatic uptake and efflux kinetics of GEM and GG based on SCHH studies. Collectively, the hepatic transporters play a key role in the disposition and thus determine the local concentrations of GEM and more so for GG, which is the predominant inhibitory species against CYP2C8 and OATP1B1.
Pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) have emerged as a group of potential environmental contaminants of concern. The occurrence of gemfibrozil, a lipid-regulating drug, was studied in the influent and effluent at a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) and groundwater below a land application site receiving treated effluent from the WWTP. In addition, the sorption of gemfibrozil in two loam soils and sand was assessed, and biological degradation rates in two soil types under aerobic conditions were also determined. Results showed that concentrations of gemfibrozil in wastewater influent, effluent, and groundwater were in the range of 3.47 to 63.8 microg/L, 0.08 to 19.4 microg/L, and undetectable to 6.86 microg/L, respectively. Data also indicated that gemfibrozil in the wastewater could reach groundwater following land application of the treated effluent. Soil-water distribution coefficients for gemfibrozil, determined by the batch equilibrium method, varied with organic carbon content in the soils. The sorption capacity was silt loam > sandy loam > sand. Under aerobic conditions, dissipation half-lives for gemfibrozil in sandy loam and silt loam soils were 17.8 and 20.6 days, respectively; 25.4 and 11.3% of gemfibrozil was lost through biodegradation from the two soils over 14 days.
Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis (NCL), also known as Batten disease, is a group of genetically distinct lysosomal disorders that mainly affect the central nervous system, resulting in progressive motor and cognitive decline primarily in children. Multiple distinct genes involved in the metabolism of lipids have been identified to date with various mutations in this family of diseases. There is no cure for these diseases but some new therapeutic approaches have been tested that offer more hope than the standard palliative care. Many of the therapeutic advances require invasive procedures but some progress in slowing the disease has been found and more options can be expected in the future. We also review the literature on children with disease/conditions other than NCL for the non-invasive use, safety, and tolerability of a lipid-lowering drug, gemfibrozil, as a potential treatment for NCLs. Gemfibrozil has shown efficacy in an animal model of NCL known as CLN2 (late infantile classic juvenile) and has been shown to be safe for lowering lipids in children. Among the 200 non-NCL children found in the published literature who were treated with gemfibrozil for NCL-related problems, only 3 experienced adverse events, including 2 with muscle pain and 1 with localized linear IgA bullous dermatitis. We conclude that gemfibrozil is safe for long-term use in children, causes minimal adverse events, is well tolerated, and may delay the progression of NCLs. Gemfibrozil may potentially be an alternative to more invasive therapeutic approaches currently under investigation and has the potential to be used in combination with other therapeutic approaches.
Fibric acid derivatives (FADs) are a class of drugs that have been shown to reduce the production of very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) while enhancing VLDL clearance due to the stimulation of lipoprotein lipase activity. The drugs can reduce plasma triglyceride levels while raising high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels. Their effects on low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels are less marked and more variable. There is evidence that oral gemfibrozil (Lopid, Parke-Davis, Morris Plains, NJ) can reduce the risk of serious coronary events, specifically in those patients who had elevations of both LDL cholesterol levels and total plasma triglyceride levels with lower HDL cholesterol levels. Newer FADs (bezafibrate, ciprofibrate, fenofibrate) have been shown to have greater efficacy in reducing LDL cholesterol than gemfibrozil but, in general, these drugs are not as effective as the other primary drugs used to lower LDL levels. The FADs are also used to treat adult patients with very high levels of triglycerides who have pancreatitis and whose disease cannot be managed with dietary therapy. The FADs are well tolerated, with dyspepsia and abdominal pain the most common adverse effects. A small risk of cholelithiasis exists with these drugs, and caution should be used when combining these drugs with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors because the combination increases the incidence of hyperlipidemic myositis and rhabdomyolysis.
PURPOSE: To compare the efficacy and safety of pravastatin, gemfibrozil, combined therapy, and placebo in the treatment of hypercholesterolemia. PATIENTS AND METHODS: At 5 centers in Sweden and 2 in Finland, 290 ambulatory patients were randomized to active treatment or placebo for 12 weeks following a single-blind placebo lead-in period. The study was double-blind and placebo-controlled. Patients has plasma total cholesterol levels of at least 6.0 mmol/L or in the 90th percentile by age and sex and triglycerides less than 4.0 mmol/L. Concentrations of lipids, lipoproteins, and apolipoproteins were measured, and clinical laboratory tests included liver function and creatine kinase determinations. RESULTS: Pravastatin reduced total cholesterol (26.3% versus 15.2%, p < or = 0.01), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) (33.5% versus 16.8%, p < or = 0.01), and apolipoprotein B (28.8% versus 15.3%, p < or = 0.01) more than gemfibrozil. Gemfibrozil reduced very-low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (VLDL-C) (49.1% versus 21.9%, p < or = 0.01) and triglycerides (42.2% versus 14.2%, p < or = 0.01) and increased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) (15.2% versus 5.9%, p < or = 0.01) more than pravastatin. Pravastatin and gemfibrozil increased apolipoprotein A-I comparably (3.3% versus 5.0%, p = NS). The combination significantly (p < or = 0.01) reduced total cholesterol (29.0%), LDL-C (37.1%), VLDL-C (49.4%), and apolipoprotein B (31.6%), and increased HDL-C (16.8%). The combination reduced the total cholesterol/HDL-C (39.3%) and LDL-C/HDL-C (45.8%) ratios significantly (p < 0.01). Adverse events and clinical laboratory abnormalities were generally mild and transient in all groups, although creatine kinase tended to be higher with combination therapy. Study drugs were withdrawn from two patients with asymptomatic creatine kinase elevations. Severe myopathy was not observed; however, the presence of subclinical musculoskeletal effects cannot be excluded. CONCLUSIONS: Co-administration of pravastatin and gemfibrozil combined the specific effects of the two drugs on lipoprotein concentrations and ratios. The incidence of side effects was low; severe myopathy did not occur. The combination may be useful in selected cases of combined hyperlipidemia; however, since myopathy at a low incidence or after long-term therapy cannot be excluded, the routine use of combination therapy is not advisable.
The UV/chlorine system has been regarded as an efficient oxidation technology for the removal of aqueous micropollutants. However, the roles of the possible radical species for this system on the elimination under environmentally relevant conditions/real waters were still largely unknown. Herein, the specific roles of radical species in the UV/chlorine oxidation degradation of gemfibrozil and naproxen as representative micropollutants were quantified by a steady-state kinetic prediction model considering the effects of water matrices. Overall, the model predicted results are consistent with the experimental data well. *OH and reactive chlorine species (RCS, such as Cl*, ClO*, and Cl(2)*(-)) contributions to gemfibrozil and naproxen degradation were water matrix specific. In pure water, both primary reactive species (i.e., *OH and Cl*) and secondary species ClO* dominated gemfibrozil and naproxen degradation, and their individual and the sum of the contributions to degradation rates reduced with pH increase of from 5 to 9. In the presence of Cl(-), we found that Cl(2)*(-) and in particular ClO* were responsible for the enhanced degradation with increasing Cl(-) concentrations due to the considerable ClO* reactivity of gemfibrozil (1.93 x 10(9) M(-1) s(-1)) and naproxen (9.24 x 10(9) M(-1) s(-1)) and the rapid transformation of Cl(2)*(-) to ClO*. The presence of HCO(3)(-) notably facilitated the degradation in the UV/chlorine process because of the generation of CO(3)*(-). CO(3)*(-) showed high reactivity with gemfibrozil and naproxen corresponding to respective second-order reaction rate constants of 2.45 x 10(7) and 3.50 x 10(7) M(-1) s(-1). Dissolved organic matter induced obvious scavenging for *OH, Cl*, and ClO* and greatly retarded the degradation. The constructed model considering the effects of above water matrix has successfully predicted the oxidation degradation kinetics in real waters, and both *OH and CO(3)*(-) are the predominant reactive species in the degradation. This study is helpful for comprehensive understanding the roles of possible radical species in micropollutant removal by UV/chlorine oxidation under real water matrix.
Gemfibrozil is a lipid-regulating agent which is generically classified as a fibric acid derivative, but which exhibits different pharmacological effects from other such drugs. Published data indicate that in patients with all types of dyslipidaemia (except type I) gemfibrozil 800 to 1200 mg/day is particularly effective in reducing total plasma triglyceride concentrations. The reduction in total plasma cholesterol is statistically significant with the most pronounced response occurring in patients with severe hypercholesterolaemia. Gemfibrozil also effectively increases high density lipoprotein cholesterol. In a 5-year double-blind prospective placebo-controlled study in over 4000 male patients with types IIa, IIb and IV primary dyslipidaemia (but without coronary symptoms), gemfibrozil 600mg twice daily significantly reduced the incidence of cardiac events (by 34%) compared with placebo, although overall mortality was not affected. In comparative studies with clofibrate similar reductions in plasma lipid levels have been observed, although these changes tend to be more favorable overall with gemfibrozil. Gastrointestinal symptoms and rash are the only side effects produced more frequently with gemfibrozil than with placebo. Although gemfibrozil is hepatotoxic in male rats, drug-induced pathological liver changes have not been reported in humans. Thus, gemfibrozil is an effective drug indicated for the treatment of severe hypertriglyceridaemia, and in certain patients with severe hypercholesterolaemia who are unresponsive to other standard therapies. In addition, it would appear to reduce the risk of cardiac events in patients with dyslipidaemia, although its effects on overall mortality remain speculative.
The disposition of the lipid-lowering drug gemfibrozil was studied in patients with either renal (n = 8) or hepatic disease (n = 8) and compared to those of healthy volunteers (n = 6). Gemfibrozil was determined in plasma and urine by means of a HPLC method. Urine was also analyzed for gemfibrozil conjugates. Following oral administration of 900 mg gemfibrozil, maximal plasma levels of the parent drug were 46.1 +/- 15.8 micrograms/ml, attained after 2.2 +/- 1.1 h. In chronic renal failure and in liver cirrhosis the plasma concentrations of gemfibrozil did not significantly differ from that of controls except in those patients who were co-medicated with antacids. These patients had significantly lower Cmax and AUC values. The elimination half-life of the drug was 1.5 h in controls, 2.4 h in renal failure, and 2.1 h in liver disease. In healthy volunteers, only 0.02 to 0.15% of the given dose was recovered in the urine as parent gemfibrozil, while conjugates made up 7-14%. In patients with renal failure also, only traces of parent gemfibrozil could be detected, and conjugates accounted for 0.5-9.8%. In those with liver disease, however, about 0.1-0.2% were recovered in urine as parent gemfibrozil and up to 50% as conjugates. Strikingly, the amount of excreted conjugates in the urine was positively correlated to the direct bilirubin plasma concentration.
The study evaluates cholesterol metabolism off and on treatment with pravastatin (P), gemfibrozil (G) and their combination (PG) in 38 middle-age hyperlipidemic primary care patients with serum cholesterol > 6 mmol/l and serum triglycerides < 4 mmol/l after a low-fat low-cholesterol diet. The subjects were randomized to P (40 mg/g), G (1200 mg/day), PG (40 + 1200 mg/day) or placebo for 12 weeks. We analyzed serum lipids, apolipoproteins A-I, B and E, serum cholesterol precursors (markers of cholesterol synthesis), serum plant sterols and cholestanol (markers of cholesterol absorption) and cholesterol metabolism by the sterol balance technique and cholesterol absorption efficiency. P alone or in combination with G lowered apoprotein E concentration, and serum cholesterol levels by inhibiting cholesterol synthesis measured by the precursor/cholesterol proportions with inconsistent change in fecal output of cholesterol. G alone decreased bile acid synthesis and increased biliary cholesterol secretion which were associated with reduced cholesterol absorption efficiency and the serum plant sterol and cholestanol proportions, and increased synthesis of cholesterol as measured both by the sterol balance technique and the precursor sterol proportions. A combination of PG also lowered LDL cholesterol similarly but triglyceride-rich lipoproteins significantly more than P alone, and otherwise inhibited the changes caused by G in cholesterol metabolism except that the precursor sterol proportions still indicated reduced cholesterol synthesis. Overall, the changes of the cholesterol precursor proportions were negatively related to that of cholesterol absorption efficiency and positively to that of cholesterol synthesis. The respective plant sterol and cholestanol values correlated oppositely to cholesterol absorption efficiency and synthesis. Serum precursor sterols reflected changes in cholesterol synthesis more sensitively than the sterol balance technique, even though only the latter method can quantitate cholesterol synthesis.
