BACKGROUND: Single inhaler triple therapies providing an inhaled corticosteroid, a long-acting muscarinic antagonist, and a long-acting beta(2)-agonist (ICS/LAMA/LABAs) are an emerging treatment option for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Nevertheless, questions remain regarding the optimal patient population for triple therapy as well as the benefit:risk ratio of ICS treatment. METHODS: ETHOS is an ongoing, randomized, double-blind, multicenter, parallel-group, 52-week study in symptomatic patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD and a history of exacerbation(s) in the previous year. Two doses of single inhaler triple therapy with budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (BGF MDI 320/18/9.6 mug and 160/18/9.6 mug) will be compared to glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF) MDI 18/9.6 mug and budesonide/formoterol fumarate (BFF) MDI 320/9.6 mug, all formulated using co-suspension delivery technology. Outcomes include the rate of moderate/severe (primary endpoint) and severe COPD exacerbations, symptoms, quality of life, and all-cause mortality. Sub-studies will assess lung function and cardiovascular safety. STUDY POPULATION: From June 2015-July 2018, 16,044 patients were screened and 8572 were randomized. Preliminary baseline demographics show that 55.9% of patients had experienced >/=2 moderate/severe exacerbations in the previous year, 79.1% were receiving an ICS-containing treatment at study entry, and 59.9% had blood eosinophil counts >/=150 cells/mm(3). CONCLUSIONS: ETHOS will provide data on exacerbations, patient-reported outcomes, mortality, and safety in 8572 patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD receiving triple and dual fixed-dose combinations. For the first time, ICS/LAMA/LABA triple therapy with two different doses of ICS will be compared to dual ICS/LABA and LAMA/LABA therapies. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02465567.
BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids have been used in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but the potential benefits of their use in triple therapy are not well known. We aimed to compare the efficacy of a triple therapy with corresponding dual therapies in symptomatic patients with moderate to very severe COPD, without a requirement for a history of exacerbations. METHODS: In this double-blind, parallel-group, multicentre phase 3 randomised controlled trial, we recruited patients from hospitals and care centres in Canada, China, Japan, and the USA. Eligible patients were 40-80 years of age, were current or former smokers (with a smoking history of >/=10 pack-years), had an established clinical history of COPD, and were symptomatic for COPD, despite receiving two or more inhaled maintenance therapies for at least 6 weeks before screening. We randomly assigned patients (2:2:1:1) using an interactive web response system to receive budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered-dose inhaler 320/18/9.6 mug (BGF MDI), glycopyrrolate/ formoterol fumarate metered-dose inhaler 18/9.6 mug (GFF MDI), budesonide/formoterol fumarate metered-dose inhaler 320/9.6 mug (BFF MDI), or open-label budesonide/formoterol fumarate dry-powder inhaler 400/12 mug (BUD/ FORM DPI). Primary endpoints for the Europe/Canada statistical analysis approach were FEV(1) area under the curve from 0-4 h (AUC(0-4)) for BGF MDI versus BFF MDI and BGF MDI versus BUD/FORM DPI over 24 weeks; and change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough FEV(1) for BGF MDI versus GFF MDI and non-inferiority of BFF MDI versus BUD/FORM DPI (margin of -50 mL from lower bound of 95% CI) over 24 weeks. Comparisons with BUD/FORM DPI were made for the Europe/Canada statistical analysis approach only. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02497001. FINDINGS: Between Aug 20, 2015, and Jan 5, 2018, 3047 patients were screened from 215 sites, and 1902 were randomly assigned to receive BGF MDI (n=640), GFF MDI (n=627), BFF MDI (n=316), or BUD/FORM DPI (n=319). Over 24 weeks, BGF MDI significantly improved FEV(1) AUC(0-4) versus BFF MDI (least squares mean difference 104 mL, 95% CI 77 to 131; p<0.0001) and BUD/FORM DPI (91 mL, 64 to 117; p<0.0001). BGF MDI also significantly improved pre-dose trough FEV(1) versus GFF MDI (22 mL, 4 to 39; p=0.0139) and was non-inferior to BUD/FORM DPI (-10 mL, -36 to 16; p=0.4390). At week 24, patients in the BGF MDI group had a significantly improved FEV(1) AUC(0-4) compared with patients receiving BFF MDI (116 mL, 95% CI 80 to 152; p<0.0001); there was a non-significant improvement in the change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough FEV(1) at week 24 versus GFF MDI (13 mL, -9 to 36 mL; p=0.2375). The most common treatment-emergent adverse events were nasopharyngitis (n=49 [8%] in the BGF MDI group; n=41 [7%] in the GFF MDI group; n=26 [8%] in the BFF MDI group; and n=30 [9%] in the BUD/FORM DPI group) and upper respiratory tract infection (n=65 [10%]; n=38 [6%]; n=18 [6%]; and n=22 [7%]). Pneumonia incidence was low (<2%) and similar across treatments. There were two treatment-related deaths, both in the GFF MDI group. INTERPRETATION: BGF MDI was efficacious, well tolerated, and could be a more appropriate treatment than the corresponding dual therapies for symptomatic patients with moderate to very severe COPD, irrespective of exacerbation history. FUNDING: Pearl-a member of the AstraZeneca Group.
OBJECTIVE: There is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of antidotes in the management of organophosphate and carbamate (OPC) poisoning. We aimed to review the efficacy and safety of glycopyrrolate in the management of OPC poisoning. METHODOLOGY: Databases such as PubMed, Scopus, Embase, and Cochrane Library were extensively searched from inception to November 2022 and updated till October 2023. Interventional, observational, and descriptive studies assessing the efficacy and safety of glycopyrrolate administered in any dose, route, and duration for the management of OPC poisoning published in the English language were considered for this review. The treatment with any other regimen that did not include glycopyrrolate was regarded as the comparator. The survival, intensive care unit (ICU) and ventilatory outcomes were considered efficacy outcomes, and adverse effects were considered safety outcomes. Suitable quality assessment tools were used to assess the risk of bias in the included studies. Two independent reviewers were involved in the study selection, data extraction, and quality assessment and any discrepancies were resolved through mutual discussion or consultation with a third reviewer. RESULTS: A total of 9 studies (2 RCTs, 4 cohorts, 1 case series, and 2 case reports) out of 591 nonduplicate records were considered for this review. Overall, the RCTs were observed to have a moderate quality, and observational studies and descriptive studies were found to have good quality. All the included studies used atropine administration as a standard treatment option along with glycopyrrolate. The OPC patients treated with glycopyrrolate had a fewer hospitalization days with comparable recovery and ventilatory outcomes than those that had not been treated with glycopyrrolate. The occurrence of adverse events and complications was lower in the glycopyrrolate group than in the control group. CONCLUSION: Currently, there is a lack of comparative studies to recommend the use of glycopyrrolate in OPC poisoning, and further interventional studies are required to make an evidencebased recommendation on this topic.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: Evaluation of bacterial growth in atropine and glycopyrrolate. DESIGN: Laboratory investigation. SUBJECTS AND MEASUREMENTS: Standard microbiological methods were used to evaluate the impact of atropine and glycopyrrolate on the growth of Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and Escherichia coli. Bacterial count was checked at 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 24 hours. MAIN RESULTS: Atropine or glycopyrrolate did not support the growth of the above bacteria at any examined time at room temperature. Glycopyrrolate killed all of the examined strains (P < .05), whereas in atropine, only the clinical isolates of Staphylococcus and Acinetobacter were killed (P < .05). CONCLUSIONS: Drawing up atropine or glycopyrrolate at the beginning of the operating list and use within 24 hours if needed are a safe practice and do not pose infection hazard. We can also reduce hospital costs if we do not throw away these unused syringes following each case.
Rationale: In the phase III, 52-week ETHOS (Efficacy and Safety of Triple Therapy in Obstructive Lung Disease) trial in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (NCT02465567), triple therapy with budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (BGF) significantly reduced all-cause mortality compared with glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF). However, 384 of 8,509 patients were missing vital status at Week 52 in the original analyses.Objectives: To assess the robustness of the ETHOS mortality findings after additional data retrieval for patients missing Week 52 vital status in the original analyses.Methods: Patients with moderate to very severe COPD and prior history of exacerbation received twice-daily dosing with 320/18/9.6 mug of BGF (BGF 320), 160/18/9.6 mug of BGF (BGF 160), 18/9.6 mug of GFF, or 320/9.6 mug of budesonide/formoterol fumarate (BFF) (all delivered via a single metered-dose Aerosphere inhaler). Time to death (all-cause) was a prespecified secondary endpoint.Measurements and Main Results: In the final retrieved dataset, which included Week 52 vital status for 99.6% of the intent-to-treat population, risk of death with BGF 320 was significantly lower than GFF (hazard ratio, 0.51; 95% confidence interval, 0.33-0.80; unadjusted P = 0.0035). There were no significant differences in mortality when comparing BGF 320 with BFF (hazard ratio, 0.72; 95% confidence interval, 0.44-1.16; P = 0.1721), nor were significant differences observed when comparing BGF 160 against either dual comparator. Results were similar when the first 30, 60, or 90 days of treatment were excluded from the analysis. Deaths from cardiovascular causes occurred in 0.5%, 0.8%, 1.4%, and 0.5% of patients in the BGF 320, BGF 160, GFF, and BFF groups, respectively.Conclusions: Using final retrieved vital status data, triple therapy with BGF 320 reduced the risk of death compared with GFF, but was not shown to significantly reduce the risk of death compared with BFF, in patients with COPD. Triple therapy containing a lower dose of inhaled corticosteroid (BGF 160) was not shown to significantly reduce the risk of death compared with the dual therapy comparators.
Glycopyrrolate, a quaternary ammonium anticholinergic compound, and atropine were evaluated in combination with neostigmine for antagonism of non-depolarizing neuromuscular block. A total of 641 patients were investigated in a "true-to-life" situation. The patients receiving glycopyrrolate with neostigmine had smaller changes in heart rate than those who received atropine. This was particularly apparent in patients with cardiovascular disease.
The effect of intravenous administration of glycopyrrolate and atropine shortly before induction were compared in a double blind study in children. The study shows that glycopyrrolate, unlike atropine, administered before anaesthesia had little effect on heart rate. The heart rate changes at, and following, tracheal intubation were similar in both groups.
The effectiveness of atropine and glycopyrrolate in the prophylaxis of suxamethonium-induced bradycardia was evaluated in a double-blind study of 56 patients. Three had clinically demonstrable bradycardia, all having received atropine. We conclude that glycopyrrolate offered adequate protection against cardiac effects of repeated doses of suxamethonium.
Aim: Glycopyrrolate (GLY) has been widely used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Recent technical advancement significantly improves the drug delivery efficiency. In a clinical dose-range determination study via electronic nebulizer, the starting dose was as low as 3-mug, thus, a bioanalytical method capable of measuring down to sub-pg/ml or fg/ml level was required to characterize pharmacokinetics of GLY. Methods: A straightforward solid-phase extraction coupled with reversed-phase LC-MS/MS method was successfully developed to quantify plasma GLY concentrations of 0.500-250 pg/mL. MS/MS detection was at ESI+ by monitoring m/z 318.3-->116.1 for GLY and 321.3-->119.1 for the internal standard GLY-d(3). Results and Conclusion: The method was validated with adequate selectivity, intra- and inter-assay precision and accuracy, dilution linearity, and sufficient stability for measuring GLY in human plasma. This method has been used for sample analysis of a clinical dose-range finding study (3-50 microg twice daily doses via an electronic nebulizer). The assay exhibited good precision, accuracy, and robustness. Pharmacokinetic analysis showed good dose proportionality over the studied dose range, where C(max) was found to be Y = 1.354*X + 1.968 (r(2) = 0.9984), and AUC(0-12 h) was Y = 4.661*X + 23.32 (r(2) = 0.9976). The study clearly demonstrated the importance of an ultrasensitive (500 fg/ml LLOQ) method.
BACKGROUND: Dual bronchodilation with a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA) fixed-dose combination (FDC) is an established treatment strategy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The relative efficacy and safety of glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI 18/9.6 mug) in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD, compared with other licensed LAMA/LABA FDCs, was investigated using an integrated Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA). METHODS: A systematic literature review and subsequent screening process identified randomized controlled trials of ⩾10 weeks' duration that enrolled patients aged ⩾40 years with moderate-to-very severe COPD and included at least one LAMA/LABA FDC or open LAMA + LABA treatment arm. NMAs were conducted for outcomes including change from baseline in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)), St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), and transition dyspnea index (TDI) parameters, annualized rate of exacerbations, use of rescue medication, adverse events, and all-cause withdrawals. Meta-regression and sensitivity analyses accounted for heterogeneity across studies. RESULTS: In total, 29 studies including 34,617 patients contributed to the NMA for efficacy or safety outcomes at week 24 or exacerbations. For all LAMA/LABA FDCs with data available, significantly greater improvements in FEV(1) [trough, peak, and area under the curve (AUC)(0-4)], SGRQ total score and TDI focal score at week 24, and annualized rate of moderate-to-severe exacerbations, were observed versus placebo. Where indirect comparisons were possible, differences between GFF MDI and other LAMA/LABA FDCs were small relative to established margins of clinical relevance, and not statistically significant. The safety and tolerability profile of GFF MDI was consistent with other LAMA/LABA FDCs and placebo. The results of the meta-regression were generally similar to the base case. CONCLUSIONS: GFF MDI demonstrated comparable efficacy and safety outcomes to other LAMA/LABA FDCs. Personalization of treatment choice within the class on the basis of other factors such as patient preference may be appropriate.
BACKGROUND: Clozapine is the only medication licensed for the treatment of resistant schizophrenia in the UK. Although efficacious, a common and unpopular side effect of clozapine treatment is clozapine-induced hypersalivation (CIH), which can contribute to non-adherence. The standard treatment for CIH in the UK is hyoscine hydrobromide but this may aggravate cognitive deficits in patients with schizophrenia while glycopyrrolate may be an effective alternative with a more tolerable side effect profile. There is currently no convincing evidence for hyoscine, or any other medication, as an effective treatment for CIH. METHODS/DESIGN: This is a multicentre randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled feasibility study of glycopyrronium bromide (glycopyrrolate) and hyoscine hydrobromide (hyoscine) in patients with clozapine-induced hypersalivation. We aim to recruit 42 patients who have been prescribed clozapine and are experiencing hypersalivation, and randomise them to one of three study arms (either hyoscine, glycopyrrolate or placebo). The primary outcome measures will be the participant recruitment and attrition rates, and the secondary outcome will be the metrics of the daytime hypersalivation measure. After a 1-week washout period (discontinuing CIH medication, if any), there will be a 4-week treatment period where participants will be titrated up to the maximum tolerated dose of hyoscine, glycopyrrolate or placebo. Measurements of daytime salivation, nocturnal salivation, cognition and side effects will be taken during home visits in week 2 and week 5. Information on salivation and side effects will also be taken through telephone calls in week 3 and week 4. To gather information on the experience of study participants, exit interviews will also be requested with all participants who drop out of the study and a sample of participants who complete the study. DISCUSSION: There is currently no convincing evidence for hyoscine, or any other medication, as an effective treatment for CIH. There is promising evidence that glycopyrrolate may be more successful in the treatment of CIH causing fewer cognitive side effects. We propose to conduct a randomised placebo-controlled feasibility study of glycopyrrolate and hyoscine in the treatment of clozapine-induced hypersalivation to inform the design of a future efficacy trial. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov NCT02613494 , 23 November 2015.
BACKGROUND: PINNACLE-4 evaluated the efficacy and safety of the long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta(2)-agonist fixed-dose combination glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI) in patients from Asia, Europe, and the USA with moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This pre-specified analysis included Japanese patients in PINNACLE-4. METHODS: In this double-blind randomized study (NCT02343458), patients received GFF MDI (18/9.6 mug), glycopyrrolate (GP) MDI (18 mug), formoterol fumarate (FF) MDI (9.6 mug), or placebo MDI twice daily for 24 weeks. The primary endpoint was change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) over Weeks 12-24. Secondary lung function endpoints, patient-reported outcomes, and safety were assessed. The Japanese subpopulation (n = 150) analyses were exploratory. RESULTS: GFF MDI improved change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough FEV(1) over Weeks 12-24 versus GP MDI, FF MDI, and placebo MDI (least squares mean [LSM] differences [95% confidence interval]: 69 [8-131], 60 [-1 to 121], and 275 [180-370] mL, respectively). GFF MDI numerically improved Transition Dyspnea Index focal score and change from baseline in St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score versus placebo MDI (LSM differences 0.19 and -3.78, respectively). Treatment-related adverse events occurred in </=4.5% of patients in any treatment group. CONCLUSIONS: GFF MDI improved lung function versus monocomponents and placebo MDI in the Japan subpopulation of PINNACLE-4. The efficacy and safety results were generally consistent with those of the global study population, supporting the use of GFF MDI in Japanese patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD.
BACKGROUND: For patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), greater improvements in lung function have been demonstrated for triple versus dual inhaled therapies in traditional spirometry studies. This study was the first to use functional respiratory imaging (FRI), known for increased sensitivity to airway changes versus spirometry, to assess the effect of the inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) component (budesonide) on lung function in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD and a blood eosinophil count > 150 cells/mm(3). METHODS: Patients in this Phase IIIb (NCT03836677), randomized, double-blind, crossover study received twice-daily budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (BGF) 320/18/9.6 mug fixed-dose triple therapy and glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF) 18/9.6 mug fixed-dose dual therapy over 4 weeks, each delivered via a single metered dose Aerosphere inhaler. Primary endpoints were the improvements from baseline for each treatment in specific (i.e. corrected for lobar volume) image-based airway volume (siVaw) and resistance (siRaw) measured via FRI taken at total lung capacity (Day 29). Secondary outcomes included spirometry and body plethysmography. Adverse events were monitored throughout the study. RESULTS: A total of 23 patients were randomized and included in the intent-to-treat analysis (mean age 64.9 years, 78.3% males, 43.5% current smokers, mean predicted post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s [FEV(1)] 63.6%). BGF and GFF both statistically significantly increased siVaw from baseline at Day 29 (geometric mean ratio [GM], 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.72 [1.38, 2.13] and 1.53 [1.28, 1.83], respectively, both p < 0.0001), with a greater increase observed for BGF versus GFF (GM, 95% CI 1.09 [1.03, 1.16], p = 0.0061). Statistically significant reductions in siRaw were also observed with both BGF and GFF (GM, 95% CI 0.50 [0.39, 0.63] and 0.52 [0.40, 0.67], respectively, both p < 0.0001). Additionally, significant improvements from baseline in post-dose FEV(1) were observed with BGF and GFF (mean 346 mL, p = 0.0003 and 273 mL, p = 0.0004, respectively). Safety findings were consistent with the known profiles of BGF and GFF. CONCLUSIONS: As observed using FRI, triple therapy with BGF resulted in greater increases in airway volume, and reductions in airway resistance versus long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LAMA/LABA) dual therapy with GFF, reflecting the ICS component's contribution in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. TRIAL REGISTRATION:  ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03836677. Registered 11 February 2019, https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03836677.
PURPOSE: Patients with COPD often have multiple coexisting comorbidities, affecting quality of life, morbidity and mortality. However, the prevalence and impact of comorbidities on the efficacy of bronchodilators in COPD is poorly understood. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this post hoc analysis, pooled data from the 12-week, placebo-controlled GOLDEN 3 and 4 studies of nebulized glycopyrrolate (GLY) in individuals with moderate-to-very-severe COPD were used to quantify comorbidities and assess their impact on treatment efficacy and safety. RESULTS: Comorbidities that were most prevalent in the GOLDEN 3 and 4 study population were hypertension, high cholesterol and osteoarthritis. Participants were grouped based on their pre-specified comorbidity count into Group A (</=2 comorbidities; n=439) and Group B (>2 comorbidities; n=854). Treatment with GLY resulted in significant improvements in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) and St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total scores, independent of comorbidity prevalence. A higher prevalence of cardiovascular disease (CVD) comorbidities was observed among individuals in Group B, compared with Group A. In a sub-analysis based on prevalence of CVD, treatment with GLY resulted in significant FEV(1) improvements independent of CVD prevalence, although values were numerically higher in the CVD group. GLY also led to higher improvements in SGRQ scores in the CVD group. GLY was well tolerated regardless of comorbidity or CVD prevalence, with a lower incidence of serious adverse events compared with placebo. CONCLUSION: A simple comorbidity count demonstrated that a majority of patients with COPD in the GOLDEN 3 and 4 studies had multiple comorbidities, with CVD being common in those with high comorbidity count. Results from this post hoc analysis demonstrate that GLY improved FEV(1) and SGRQ scores in individuals with COPD, independent of their comorbidities or CVD status.
Heart rate, demeanor, and facial flushing following intramuscular injection of atropine or glycopyrrolate were compared in 80 paediatric patients under 1 year of age. No significant differences occurred between the two drugs in the doses used. Neither was there any difference in drug response between those children aged under 2 months and the other patients in the study.
BACKGROUND: Long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA) combinations are a treatment option for patients with COPD who continue to have symptoms despite treatment with a LAMA or a LABA alone. The Efficacy and Safety of PT003, PT005, and PT001 in Subjects with Moderate-to-Very Severe COPD (PINNACLE-1) (NCT01854645) and the Multi-Center Study to Assess the Efficacy and Safety of PT003, PT005, and PT001 in Subjects with Moderate-to-Very Severe COPD (PINNACLE-2) (NCT01854658) trials investigated the efficacy and safety of a novel glycopyrrolate [GP]/formoterol [FF] 18/9.6-mug (GFF) metered dose inhaler (MDI) formulated using the Co-Suspension Delivery Technology in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD. METHODS: These two phase III trials took place over 24 weeks and were randomized, double blind, and placebo controlled; 2,103 and 1,615 patients (40-80 years of age), respectively, were randomized. Patients received GFF MDI, GP MDI 18 mug, FF MDI 9.6 mug, or placebo MDI (all twice daily), or tiotropium 18 mug dry powder inhaler (once daily in PINNACLE-1 only [open-label active comparator]). Efficacy and safety were assessed. RESULTS: At week 24, differences in change from baseline in the morning predose trough FEV(1) for GFF MDI vs placebo MDI, GP MDI, and FF MDI were 150 mL, 59 mL, and 64 mL in PINNACLE-1 (all P < .0001) and 103 mL, 54 mL, and 56 mL in PINNACLE-2 (all P < .001), respectively. There were no significant safety findings (incidence of adverse events was similar between treatment arms). CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that GFF MDI 18/9.6 mug demonstrated superiority over placebo and monocomponent MDIs and was well tolerated, thus providing an additional treatment option for patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD. TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: NCT01854645 and No. NCT01854658; URL: www.clinicaltrials.gov.
BACKGROUND: Glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI) is a long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta(2)-agonist fixed-dose combination therapy delivered by MDI, formulated using innovative co-suspension delivery technology. The PINNACLE-4 study evaluated the efficacy and safety of GFF MDI in patients with moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) from Asia, Europe, and the USA. This article presents the results from the China subpopulation of PINNACLE-4. METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group Phase III study (NCT02343458), patients received GFF MDI 18/9.6 microg, glycopyrrolate (GP) MDI 18 microg, formoterol fumarate (FF) MDI 9.6 microg, or placebo MDI (all twice daily) for 24 weeks. The primary endpoint was change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second at Week 24. Secondary lung function endpoints and patient-reported outcome measures were also assessed. Safety was monitored throughout the study. RESULTS: Overall, 466 patients from China were included in the intent-to-treat population (mean age 63.6 years, 95.7% male). Treatment with GFF MDI improved the primary endpoint compared to GP MDI, FF MDI, and placebo MDI (least squares mean differences: 98, 104, and 173 mL, respectively; all P</=0.0001). GFF MDI also improved daily total symptom scores and time to first clinically important deterioration versus monocomponents and placebo MDI, and Transition Dyspnea Index focal score versus placebo MDI. Rates of treatment-emergent adverse events were similar across the active treatment groups and slightly higher in the placebo MDI group. CONCLUSION: GFF MDI improved lung function and daily symptoms versus monocomponents and placebo MDI and improved dyspnea versus placebo MDI. All treatments were well tolerated with no unexpected safety findings. Efficacy and safety results were generally consistent with the global PINNACLE-4 population, supporting the use of GFF MDI in patients with COPD from China.
BACKGROUND: Budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (BGF MDI), formulated using co-suspension delivery technology, is a triple fixed-dose combination in late-stage clinical development for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). METHODS: We conducted two studies to characterize the pharmacokinetic (PK) profile of BGF MDI in patients with COPD: (i) a phase I, open-label, single and chronic (7-day) dosing study (NCT03250182) with one treatment arm (BGF MDI 320/18/9.6 mug); and (ii) a PK sub-study of KRONOS (NCT02497001), a phase III, randomized, double-blind study in which patients received 24 weeks' treatment with BGF MDI 320/18/9.6 mug, glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF) MDI 18/9.6 mug, budesonide/formoterol fumarate (BFF) MDI 320/9.6 mug, or budesonide/formoterol fumarate dry powder inhaler (BUD/FORM DPI) 320/9 mug. PK parameters in both studies included maximum observed plasma concentration (C(max)) and area under the plasma concentration-time curve from 0 to 12h (AUC(0-12)). RESULTS: In the phase I PK study (30 patients), budesonide and glycopyrronium C(max) were comparable after single and chronic dosing of BGF MDI (accumulation ratio [R(AC)] 95% and 107%, respectively) whereas C(max) for formoterol was slightly higher after chronic dosing (R(AC) 116%). AUC(0-12) for budesonide, glycopyrronium, and formoterol were higher following chronic versus single dosing, with an R(AC) of 126%, 179%, and 143%, respectively. After 7 days' dosing, AUC(0-12) and C(max) for all three components of BGF MDI were similar to those in the KRONOS PK sub-study (202 patients) at Week 24. In the latter sub-study, C(max) and AUC(0-12) at Week 24 were generally comparable across treatments for budesonide (geometric mean ratios [GMR] of 96%-109% for BGF MDI vs BFF MDI or BUD/FORM DPI), glycopyrronium (GMR of 88%-100% for BGF MDI vs GFF MDI), and formoterol (GMR of 80%-113% for BGF MDI vs GFF MDI or BFF MDI). CONCLUSIONS: Steady-state PK parameters of budesonide, glycopyrronium, and formoterol were similar after 7 days' dosing in the phase I PK study and after 24 weeks in the KRONOS PK sub-study. Systemic exposure to budesonide, glycopyrronium, and formoterol was generally comparable across treatments in the KRONOS PK sub-study, suggesting no meaningful drug-drug or within-formulation PK interactions.
