Haloperidol (HP) is widely used in the treatment of several forms of psychosis. Despite of its efficacy, HP use is a cause of concern for the elevated risk of adverse drug reactions. adverse drug reactions risk and HP efficacy greatly vary across subjects, indicating the involvement of several factors in HP mechanism of action. The use of biomarkers that could monitor or even predict HP treatment impact would be of extreme importance. We reviewed the elements that could potentially be used as peripheral biomarkers of HP effectiveness. Although a validated biomarker still does not exist, we underlined the several potential findings (e.g., about cytokines, HP metabolites and genotypic biomarkers) which could pave the way for future research on HP biomarkers.
1. The authors established a method for measuring haloperidol (HAL) reductase activity in human red blood cells. 2. Characteristics of the HAL reductase in red blood cells were examined. This enzyme reaction was NADPH dependent, and the optimum pH was at 8.2-8.9. Vmax and Km were calculated as 25-150 pmol/hr/10(6) RBC and 160-2600 microM respectively. 3. HAL reductase activities in red blood cells from 14 patients treated with HAL were in a range of 9.7-20.8 pmol/hr/10(6) RBC. So far we did not find any significant correlation between HAL reductase activities and reduced HAL/HAL ratios in plasma.
Haloperidol (HL) and reduced haloperidol (RH) plasma concentrations were measured in geriatric patients (n = 45) and schizophrenic patients (n = 8). In the elderly patients, HL doses were 1-4 mg/day while only 2 mg/day was used in the schizophrenics. At HL 2 mg/day dose in both age groups, mean plasma HL levels were approximately twice as high in the elderly patients compared to the schizophrenics (1.39 +/- 0.82 vs. 0.56 +/- 0.23 ng/ml, p < 0.02). RH plasma concentrations were almost 5 times greater in the elderly patients (0.54 +/- 0.35 vs. 0.09 +/- 0.05 ng/ml, p < 0.0001). These results suggest that HL plasma concentrations in the elderly are greater than in adult schizophrenic patients treated with similar HL doses.
The drug difference between a low and a high dosage of haloperidol was investigated in 40 acutely ill schizophrenic patients. All patients were classified as being thought disordered or non-thought disordered schizophrenic using psychometric methods. From the pool of 40 patients two groups were randomly chosen for the double-blind study, one group receiving 80 mg of liquid haloperidol daily, the other group 16 mg of liquid haloperidol daily. On 5 days during the 21-day treatment the psychopathological state of the patient was evaluated by means of the AMDP system.
Two investigators have recently suggested therapeutic ranges for plasma haloperidol in the treatment of schizophrenia. An apparent optimal therapeutic range of red blood cell haloperidol as early as day 7 of the drug trial is described in this article. With continued treatment, an optimal plasma haloperidol range for response could be observed by day 14 of treatment. The previously described correlation between response at day 7 and plasma/red blood cell haloperidol ratio was confirmed but was found not to predict response at day 14 of drug treatment in this cohort of DSM-III schizophrenic patients.
1. The authors attempted to correlate plasma concentrations in H/rH and clinical efficacy from 8 schizophrenic patients (DSM IIIR) on H. 2. No significant correlations were found between H, rH plasma levels and positive and negative subscale for each patient. 3. The authors observed an opposite evolution concerning the mean results between plasma concentrations and PANSS total score.
A 28-year-old woman presenting with agitation and mania with psychotic features developed symptoms of isolated lingual dystonia shortly after the initiation of a haloperidol concentrate regimen.
A rapid, sensitive and reproducible HPLC method was developed and validated for the analysis of haloperidol and its three main metabolites in human plasma. The analysis was carried out on a monolithic silica column (Chromolith Performance RP-18e, 100 x 4.6 mm). The mobile phase consisted of sodium phosphate (0.1 m, pH 3.5)-acetonitrile (80:20, v/v) at a flow rate of 2.0 mL/min. UV detection at 230 nm was used, with the detection limits of these compounds ranging from 2 to 5 ng. The separation factors of all studied compounds were in the range 2.30-16.32, while the resolution factors were from 1.00 to 5.37.
Recent reports have suggested an augmentation by ascorbic acid of haloperidol treatment of schizophrenic patients. This study was designed to examine whether pharmacokinetic interactions between ascorbic acid and haloperidol occur in this population. Eight male inpatients diagnosed as having chronic schizophrenia by DSM-III-R criteria and stabilized on a fixed dose of haloperidol were given oral doses of ascorbic acid, 4.5 grams daily, for 2 weeks in an open trial. Serum concentrations of haloperidol and is metabolite, reduced haloperidol, were measured by high performance liquid chromatography. Psychiatric symptoms were monitored using the Psychiatric Symptom Assessment Scale performed by nursing staff blind to the haloperidol status but not to the ascorbic acid dosage. The addition of ascorbic acid was not associated with any change in psychopathology in this group of patients, nor was there any apparent pharmacokinetic interaction with haloperidol.
1. Haloperidol (HAL) reductase activity in red blood cells (RBC) was determined by a newly developed assay method in 120 blood samples from 75 Japanese psychiatric patients receiving HAL. 2. Plasma concentrations of HAL and reduced haloperidol (RHAL), a reductive metabolite of haloperidol, were also measured in these samples. 3. RBC concentrations of HAL and RHAL were measured in 62 of these samples. 4. No significant correlations were found between HAL reductase activity in RBC vs plasma or RBC RHAL/HAL ratios, which may represent activity of the enzyme metabolizing HAL into RHAL. 5. RHAL concentrations were three times higher in RBC than in plasma, though HAL concentrations were at the same level in both tissues. This may reflect accumulation of RHAL in RBC.
Haloperidol decanoate is a depot preparation of haloperidol, a commonly used butyrophenone derivative with antipsychotic activity. Haloperidol decanoate has no intrinsic activity: its pharmacodynamic actions are those of haloperidol--primarily that of central antidopamine activity. The monthly administered depot formulation has several clinical and practical advantages over oral haloperidol: better compliance and more predictable absorption; more controlled plasma concentrations; fewer extrapyramidal side effects; less frequent reminders of condition; and reduced medical workload. In open and controlled studies, haloperidol decanoate has produced adequate maintenance or improvement of the condition of patients with psychoses (mainly schizophrenia) when an abrupt change from orally administered haloperidol or other antipsychotic drugs has been instituted. Limited comparative studies indicate that the depot and oral forms of haloperidol are equally effective, and that haloperidol decanoate is at least as effective as depot forms of fluphenazine, pipothiazine, flupenthixol and perphenazine in controlling the symptoms of psychosis. Extrapyramidal side effects and the need for concomitant anti-Parkinsonian drugs may be a problem, but may be less frequent than with oral haloperidol or other depot antipsychotics. Thus, haloperidol decanoate offers a useful alternative in the treatment of psychoses to orally administered haloperidol or to other depot antipsychotic drugs.
1. Haloperidol and reduced haloperidol plasma levels were measured in schizophrenic patients who received both oral (10 mg, N=16 and 20 mg, N=4) and depot haloperidol treatment 2. Patients were of Asian ethnicity and were safely and effectively converted from oral to depot therapy using a loading dose regimen using a 100 mg weekly injection interval for 4 weeks, biweekly for one month and then monthly. 3. Significant correlations were found for plasma haloperidol and reduced haloperidol levels and reduced haloperidol/haloperidol ratios between oral and depot therapy in these non-smoking patients. 4. A loading dose regimen is needed due to the long elimination half-life of decanoate of 26 days otherwise steady-state condition will not occur until 34 months of therapy. 5. Patients were maintained on monthly depot treatment for 40 weeks after the loading dose regimen and only one patient relapsed during treatment despite dosage increases. 6. The formation of reduced haloperidol remained consistent for oral and depot haloperidol treatment.
We developed a sensitive HPLC assay to measure haloperidol (HA) and its metabolite, reduced haloperidol (RH), in plasma and whole blood. The conditions under which HA might be converted to RH during collection and analysis of blood were examined. Provided the blood was kept at 0 degrees C, erythrocyte ketone reductase activity was insignificant. The solid phase extraction method did not generate RH. We studied ten patients taking 25-400 mg/month of HA decanoate and one patient for 4 weeks after the daily oral dose of 120 mg HA was ceased. In the patients on depot HA, the plasma and blood concentrations of HA were not significantly different (P greater than 0.1). For the first time, RH was detected in plasma patients on depot drug, but only in three cases. In contrast, RH was present in the blood of eight of these patients. The accumulation of RH in red blood cells was also evident in the patient on oral HA, in whom the mean ratio of RH concentrations in whole blood to plasma was 3.6 +/- 1.1. Plasma concentrations of HA correlated highly with total neuroleptic activity measured by a radioreceptor assay. Compared to plasma, analysis of concentrations of HA and RH in blood has the advantages of greater sensitivity, of using smaller volumes of blood and of avoiding the efflux of HA and RH during separation of plasma and red cells.
In a four-segment long-term (greater than or equal to 6 mo) study, patients with schizophrenia received oral haloperidol in single daily doses and subsequently depot intramuscular (IM) haloperidol decanoate q28d. For each route of administration, a period of stabilization was followed by a maintenance period. Dosages for both oral haloperidol and IM haloperidol decanoate were determined on the basis of the patient's past psychiatric history and clinical response during the stabilization period. To characterize the concentration-time profile of the two routes of administration, blood samples were obtained on two separate occasions at steady state during maintenance dosing for each route of administration. Examination of values for cumulative area under the plasma concentration-time curves (AUC) to each sampling time indicated a sustained release of haloperidol from the intramuscularly administered haloperidol decanoate. Dose ranges during maintenance periods were 5-35 mg/d for oral haloperidol (mean, 17 mg/d), and 75-500 mg/28 d for IM haloperidol decanoate (mean, haloperidol decanoate was 243 mg equivalents of haloperidol/28 d). The ratio of long-acting to daily oral doses during maintenance therapy ranged from 9.4:1.0 to 15.0:1.0 (mean, 14.1:1.0). At these ratios, plasma concentration data showed that haloperidol decanoate gave lower values than did oral haloperidol for peak plasma, minimum plasma, and mean steady-state plasma concentrations. The absolute concentration swing was significantly less for decanoate than for the oral drug. Dose-normalized AUC values were compared determine the IM dose of haloperidol decanoate that would have yielded haloperidol plasma concentrations equivalent to those resulting from daily oral administration of haloperidol for 28 days.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
OBJECTIVE: The authors sought to determine if an acute dose of dextroamphetamine might have positive effects on affect and cognition in schizophrenic patients maintained on a regimen of haloperidol and, if so, what variables might predict such improvements. METHOD: Twenty-one patients with chronic schizophrenia who were hospitalized on a research ward received a single oral dose of dextroamphetamine (0.25 mg/kg) in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. All patients were receiving 0.4 mg/kg per day of haloperidol. Cognitive tests, motor tests, global ratings, mood ratings, and videotape ratings were used to determine the effect of the coadministration of these drugs. Ventricle-brain ratios derived from CT scans were used to predict response to the coadministration of these drugs. RESULTS: Amphetamine improved performance on a measure of concept formation on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test but did not result in changes in performance on tests of memory or attention. As a group, the patients were more active and performed psychomotor tests more quickly while receiving amphetamine. Six patients were judged by clinical raters to have improved in terms of affect, cooperation, and engagement with the environment. Improvement was associated with enlarged cerebral ventricles and increases in blink rate from the placebo to the active drug condition. No patient unequivocally worsened. CONCLUSIONS: These results may be consistent with the theory that coadministration of amphetamine and haloperidol produces relatively selective enhancement of cortical dopaminergic activity. However, because of the acute nature of the trial and the specialized research environment in which it was conducted, the authors do not advocate amphetamine as a routine clinical treatment of schizophrenia.
Twelve male chronic schizophrenic inpatients, neuroleptic-free for at least 4 weeks, were given an oral test dose of 10 mg haloperidol (HAL) and reduced HAL (RHAL) in a random order, with a 2-week interval. Two weeks after the last test dose, the patients were given HAL, 5 mg orally twice daily for 7 days. Blood samples were drawn at baseline and between 0.5 and 24 hr after the test doses, and during HAL treatment as well. Plasma drug concentrations and homovanillic acid (HVA) levels were measured with high-performance liquid chromatography using electrochemical detection. HAL, but not RHAL, produced increments in plasma HVA (pHVA) levels at 24 hr after a test dose. pHVA levels remained higher than baseline during HAL treatment. Detectable interconversion between HAL and RHAL was observed in eight patients. The capacity of the reductive drug-metabolizing enzyme system, however, was greater than that of the oxidative processes. The plasma RHAL:HAL ratios on days 6 and 7 were higher than and positively correlated with those at Tmax after a single dose of HAL and were negatively correlated with the HAL:RHAL ratios at Tmax after a single dose of RHAL. Thus, both reductive and oxidative drug-metabolizing systems probably contribute to individual differences in plasma RHAL:HAL ratios in HAL-treated schizophrenic patients.
A case of haloperidol-induced bronchospasm is described, and possible etiologies are suggested. Since haloperidol is commonly used in the treatment of psychoses, it is important for clinicians to be aware of this potentially lethal yet treatable side-effect.
