Hexitol nucleic acid (HNA) is an analogue of DNA containing the standard nucleoside bases, but with a phosphorylated 1,5-anhydrohexitol backbone. HNA oligomers form duplexes having the nucleic acid A structure with complementary DNA or RNA oligomers. The HNA decacytidylate oligomer is an efficient template for the oligomerization of the 5'-phosphoroimidazolides of guanosine or deoxyguanosine. Comparison of the oligomerization efficiencies on HNA, RNA, and DNA decacytidylate templates under various conditions suggests strongly that only nucleic acid double helices with the A structure support efficient template-directed synthesis when 5'-phosphoroimidazolides of nucleosides are used as substrates.
Several hybrid molecules have been synthesized which contain both the 1,4:3,6-dianhydro-hexitol (isohexide) and glycerol partial structures, with nitrate ester groups at different positions. Alkylation of the isohexide ring system with suitable 3-carbon units generates compounds with the 2,3-epoxypropyl side chain as key intermediates. Ring opening of these oxiranes under various conditions yield primary and secondary nitrates as well as dinitrates. Pharmacological screening shows that the new structures are much less active than the parent compounds.
Current standard therapy for the treatment of chronic infections with hepatitis C virus consists of combination therapy with (pegylated) interferon-alpha and ribavirin. 1,5-Anhydrohexitol nucleoside analogues are constrained congeners known to mimic the ribonucleoside conformation. Within this series some analogues are endowed with strong antiviral properties, particularly against herpesviruses. The six-membered anhydrohexitol ring was, therefore, combined with the triazolyl carboxamide moiety of ribavirin, thus providing a new series of ribavirin analogues. None of the newly synthesized compounds elicited any substantial antiviral activity, neither against herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2, nor against bovine viral diarrhoea virus (a surrogate for hepatitis C virus) or the yellow fever virus.
Hexitol nucleic acids (HNAs) are DNA analogues that contain the standard nucleoside bases attached to a phosphorylated 1,5-anhydrohexitol backbone. We find that HNAs support efficient information transfer in nonensymatic template-directed reactions. HNA heterosequences appeared to be superior to the corresponding DNA heterosequences in facilitating synthesis of complementary oligonucleotides from nucleoside-5'-phosphoro-2-methyl imidazolides.
Hexitol nucleic acid (HNA) is a new steric blocking oligonucleotide, hybridizing sequence selectively with RNA. The biological activity of HNA was evaluated in an in vitro translation arrest system targeting Ha-ras mRNA and in a cellular system targeting intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression. HNA very efficiently and selectively inhibited Ha-ras mRNA translation (IC(50) of 50 nM) when targeted at the translation initiation region. When targeting at the 12th codon region, a gap-mer approach was needed to inhibit mRNA translation. Similarly, HNA inhibited ICAM-1 expression in keratinocytes when targeting at codon sequences. In this test system, HNA is less active but more selective than phosphorothioates, but needs lipofection to become active in keratinocytes. This new steric blocker may be an efficient antisense agent providing that enough material can be brought into cells.
The design and facile synthesis of novel chiral piperidine PNA from naturally occurring 4-hydroxy-L-proline is reported. The stereospecific ring-expansion reaction to get six-membered piperidine derivative from 5-membered pyrrolidine derivative is exploited for this synthesis. The resulting conformationally constrained PNA is utilized for the synthesis of PNA mixmers and the concept is substantiated by UV-Tm studies of the resulting PNA(2):DNA complexes.
Comparative quantitation of plaque organic acids formed in vivo in the course of chewing sucrose and sorbitol-mannitol containing gums disclosed that the hexitol gum did not generate any additional lactic, formic, butyric, propionic, acetic or pyruvic acid beyond baseline (0 time) values. In contrast, sucrose-containing gum produced significant increases in lactic and butyric acids. Quantitatively, acetic acid was the major acid in all plaque samples; the values were comparable for both gums at all times, suggesting it was mainly generated from endogenous sources.
Four neoglycolipids having 2-amino-2-deoxy-D-glucose or D-galactose moieties linked to the lipidic part by a glucitol or a mannitol spacer-arm have been synthesized. The key step of the synthetic strategy was the regiospecific or regioselective beta-glycosylation of partially protected glucitol or mannitol acceptors by either 3,4,6-tri-O-acetyl-2-deoxy-2-iodo-alpha-D-mannopyranosyl azide or 2,3,4,6-tetra-O-benzoyl-alpha-D-galactopyranosyl trichloroacetimidate donors.
In an effort to further improve the hybridisation potential of anhydro-hexitol nucleoside analogues, the 1'-methoxyl and 3'-methoxyl substituents were introduced and evaluated for their antisense potential. In view of the selectivity of pairing with RNA, especially the introduction of a 3'-O-alkyl moiety deserves further study.
Several ribavirin congeners containing a hexitol moiety were prepared via ring opening of two different epoxides with the methylcarboxylate ester of triazole and further elaboration. Unfortunately, none of the newly synthesized compounds displayed appreciable antiviral activity.
Two major hurdles to the widespread use of synthetic nucleic acids as drugs are the biological stability of the compounds and efficiency of cellular penetration. Recent advances in the chemistry of nucleic acids has given rise to highly stable derivatives with an anhydrohexitol backbone. This report addresses the cellular uptake of these molecules. We show that the uptake of HNA in the absence of a carrier is very low but HNA is efficiently internalized with a range of transfection reagents.
Regulation of hexitol catabolism was investigated in Streptococcus mutans, a cariogenic human dental plaque bacterium. Induction of hexitol catabolic enzymes and phosphoenolpyruvate:hexitol phosphotransferase and hexitol phosphate dehydrogenase activities was regulated by an inducer exclusion mechanism initiated by D-glucose and 2-deoxy-D-glucose. Kinetic analysis of the inhibitory effect of 2-deoxy-D-glucose on initial hexitol uptake illustrated that this was a noncompetitive type of inhibition. In mutant strains of S. mutans lacking phosphoenolpyruvate:glucose phosphotransferase activity, 2-deoxy-D-glucose was unable to inhibit hexitol uptake. These observations provide evidence for possible molecular mechanisms for the exclusion process.
The synthesis and a preliminary investigation of the base pairing properties of (6' --> 4')-linked 1',5'-anhydro-L-ribo-hexitol nucleic acids (alpha-L-HNA) have herein been reported through the study of a model oligoadenylate system in the mirror image world. Despite its considerable preorganization due to the rigidity of the "all equatorial" pyranyl sugar backbone, alpha-L-HNA represents a versatile informational biopolymer, in view of its capability to cross-communicate with natural and unnatural complements in both enantiomeric forms. This seems the result of an inherent flexibility of the oligonucleotide system, as witnessed by the singular formation of iso- and heterochiral associations composed of regular, enantiomorphic helical structures. The peculiar properties of alpha-L-HNA (and most generally of the alpha-HNA system) provide new elements in our understanding of the structural prerequisites ruling the stereoselectivity of the hybridization processes of nucleic acids.
A new series of anhydrohexitol nucleosides are described. These compounds have a pyrimidine base moiety substituted in the 5-position with a chloro (1b), trifluoromethyl (1c), vinyl (1d), 2-thienyl (1e), ethynyl (1f) or propynyl (1g) substituent. The vinyl, propynyl, and, in particular, the 5-trifluoromethyl analogue showed potent activity against herpes simplex virus (HSV), 1c with a selectivity index of >16000 against HSV-1 and >1000 against HSV-2. Conformational analysis of anhydrohexitol nucleosides using computational methods indicates that these nucleosides occur in an equilibrium between the C1 and 1C form with a DeltaE of 5.9 kJ/mol. When the anhydrohexitol nucleoside is cocrystallized with the HSV-1 thymidine kinase it adopts a 1C conformation, which is opposite to the conformation found for the small molecule alone. The enzyme, apparently, induces a conformational change, and conformational flexibility of an anhydrohexitol nucleoside may be advantageous for recognition by viral enzymes.
The synthesis, biophysical, structural, and biological properties of both isomers of 3'-fluoro hexitol nucleic acid (FHNA and Ara-FHNA) modified oligonucleotides are reported. Synthesis of the FHNA and Ara-FHNA thymine phosphoramidites was efficiently accomplished starting from known sugar precursors. Optimal RNA affinities were observed with a 3'-fluorine atom and nucleobase in a trans-diaxial orientation. The Ara-FHNA analog with an equatorial fluorine was found to be destabilizing. However, the magnitude of destabilization was sequence-dependent. Thus, the loss of stability is sharply reduced when Ara-FHNA residues were inserted at pyrimidine-purine (Py-Pu) steps compared to placement within a stretch of pyrimidines (Py-Py). Crystal structures of A-type DNA duplexes modified with either monomer provide a rationalization for the opposing stability effects and point to a steric origin of the destabilization caused by the Ara-FHNA analog. The sequence dependent effect can be explained by the formation of an internucleotide C-F...H-C pseudo hydrogen bond between F3' of Ara-FHNA and C8-H of the nucleobase from the 3'-adjacent adenosine that is absent at Py-Py steps. In animal experiments, FHNA-modified antisense oligonucleotides formulated in saline showed a potent downregulation of gene expression in liver tissue without producing hepatotoxicity. Our data establish FHNA as a useful modification for antisense therapeutics and also confirm the stabilizing influence of F(Py)...H-C(Pu) pseudo hydrogen bonds in nucleic acid structures.
No backbone motif other than phospho-ribose and phospho-deoxyribose has been found in natural nucleic acids, currently restricting the molecular types of replicable biopolymers to DNA and RNA. With the aim of propagating and expressing a third type of nucleic acid in vivo, we assessed the replicability of polynucleotides with a phospho-hexitol backbone (HNA) in vivo and in vitro. Faithful polymerisation of up to four deoxynucleotides templated by hexitol oligonucleotides was established in vitro using DNA polymerase from Escherichia coli (PolA Klenow exo-fragment) and Thermus aquaticus (Taq polymerase). Condensation of up to three successive hTTPs (hexitol thymidine triphosphate) in responses to a pentameric hexitol template (hA)5 could also be demonstrated in vitro. Such a marginal HNA-dependent HNA polymerase activity of natural polymerases may be evolved in the future to catalyse in vitro amplification of HNA. The transmission of a two-codon-long genetic message carried on a hexameric hexitol template was also established using a selection screen for restoring thymidylate synthase activity in E. coli. These results exemplify the potential that can be explored by converting artificial substrates with natural enzymes in the field of informational polymer synthesis.
