Hydralazine (4) is an antihypertensive agent that displays both mutagenic and epigenetic properties. Here, gel electrophoretic, mass spectroscopic, and chemical kinetics methods were used to provide evidence that medicinally relevant concentrations of 4 rapidly form covalent adducts with abasic sites in double- and single-stranded DNA under physiological conditions. These findings raise the intriguing possibility that the genotoxic properties of this clinically used drug arise via reactions with an endogenous DNA lesion rather than with the canonical structure of DNA.
BACKGROUND: Current guidelines for the management of asymptomatic hypertension (HTN) in the inpatient setting recommend the use of oral antihypertensives. However, in clinical practice, intravenous (IV) antihypertensives are commonly utilised with little supporting evidence. The objective of this study was to evaluate literature examining the safety/efficacy of IV hydralazine and labetalol in hospitalised patients with non-emergent, asymptomatic HTN. METHODS: The PRISMA guidelines were utilised to structure the systematic review. A search strategy composed of drug-, inpatient- and HTN-related terms was conducted utilising PubMed, Embase and Scopus databases through May 2020. Full-text, English-language articles describing IV labetalol and/or hydralazine use for non-emergent HTN in an inpatient setting that focused on clinical outcomes (ie vitals, adverse effects, healthcare utilisation) were included. Identified studies were screened/extracted using DistillerSR by two reviewers at each stage, and studies were evaluated qualitatively for the presence of bias. RESULTS: From 3362 records identified in the search, a final set of 10 articles were identified. Four studies focused on labetalol (40%), five studies on hydralazine and labetalol (50%), and one study on hydralazine (10%). The included studies presented a variety of outcomes, but several trends were identified, including reduction in average blood pressure in eight (80%) studies, a risk of adverse effects in six (60%) and increased length of stay in one (10%). DISCUSSION: The studies identified in this review raise concerns regarding the safety of IV hydralazine and labetalol in non-emergent HTN. Despite relatively broad clinical experience with these drugs, experimental investigations regarding their utility are recommended.
BACKGROUND: Hydralazine (H) and nitrates (Ns), when combined, reduced morbidity and mortality in some trials of chronic heart failure (CHF). It is unclear whether either agent used alone provides similar benefits. We aimed to evaluate the effects of H and/or N in patients with CHF. METHODS: A systematic review of randomised trials assessing the effects of H and N in CHF. For meta-analysis, only the endpoints of all-cause mortality and cardiovascular mortality were considered. RESULTS: In seven trials evaluating H&N in 2626 patients, combination therapy reduced all-cause mortality (OR 0.72; 95% CI 0.55-0.95; p=0.02), and cardiovascular mortality (OR 0.75; 95% CI 0.57-0.99; p=0.04) compared to placebo. However, when compared to angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), combination therapy was associated with higher all-cause mortality (OR 1.35; 95% CI 1.03-1.76; p=0.03), and cardiovascular mortality (OR 1.37; 95% CI 1.04-1.81; p=0.03). For N alone, ten trials including 375 patients reported all-cause mortality and showed a trend to harm (13 deaths in those assigned to nitrates and 7 to placebo; OR 2.13; 95% CI 0.88-5.13; p=0.09). For H alone, three trials showed no difference in all-cause mortality compared to placebo (OR 0.96; 95% CI 0.37-2.47; p=0.93), and two trials suggested inferiority to ACEI (OR 2.28; 95% CI 1.03-5.04; p=0.04). CONCLUSIONS: Compared to placebo, H&N reduces mortality in patients with CHF. Whether race or background therapy influences benefit is uncertain, but on direct comparison H&N appears inferior to ACEI. There is little evidence to support the use of either drug alone in CHF.
Background: Preeclampsia is a highly prevalent disease among pregnant women. In the event of hypertensive emergency, nifedipine, labetalol, and hydralazine are assigned as first-line therapies in preeclampsia. Further studies are needed to compare the effectiveness of these drugs to find the most cost-effective drug with minimal side effects. This study aimed to compare the effectiveness of these drugs in lowering blood pressure during hypertensive emergencies in severe preeclampsia. Methods: 60 pregnant women with severe preeclampsia were recruited in this multiple centre double-blind randomized clinical trial from May 2021 to April 2022 in Indonesia. The patients were divided equally into three groups and treated with three doses of nifedipine, labetalol, and hydralazine, respectively within one hour with 20 minutes interval. The effectiveness was measured based on systolic and diastolic blood pressures, and mean arterial pressure (MAP). The observation was carried out until five hours post-third dose administration. Results: The blood pressure was reduced significantly after the administration of the first to the third dose of each antihypertensive (p<0.05). A single dose administration, four, one, and three patients had 20% MAP reduction in nifedipine, labetalol, and hydralazine group. Three, seven, and one patient had a failure of reaching 20% MAP reduction even after receiving the third dose. The effectiveness of the drugs to achieve 20% reduction of MAP could be ranked as follows: nifedipine>labetalol>hydralazine (57.49%, 42.13%, and 40.87%, respectively) for single dose and hydralazine>nifedipine>labetalol (111.3%, 85.12%, and 90.04%, respectively) for triple dose. Conclusions: Nifedipine is the most effective drug to reduce the blood pressure when single dose administration is used, but requires more doses to further reduce the blood pressure. Hydralazine is the most effective when the drug administration is maxed up to three doses within 60 minutes with 20 minutes interval. Thai Clinical Trials Registry (TCTR): TCTR20221014007 (14/10/2022).
This report describes a 59-year-old woman, who, after an initial reaction to hydralazine, inadvertently took the drug again. She promptly developed symptoms of acute cholangitis--fever, right upper quadrant tenderness, obtundation, and hypotension. Cholecystectomy was performed and no obstruction or infection of the biliary tract was present. Perioperative studies support a diagnosis of hydralazine-induced acute cholangitis, a side effect of the drug which has not been previously described.
In the USA alone, there are over 5,000,000 people diagnosed with heart failure. A disproportionate number of African-Americans are affected by this disease, with increased morbidity and mortality, yet they are tremendously under-represented in clinical trials. Several drugs have been approved for use in heart failure based on clinical trials, with percentages of African-American subjects as low as 1%. In the African-American Heart Failure Trial the use of BiDil, a drug combining isosorbide dinitrate and hydralazine hydrochloride, demonstrated a 43% decrease in overall mortality and a 39% decrease in first hospitalization. The combination consists of 20 mg of isosorbide and 37.5 mg hydralazine hydrochloride in a fixed dose that functions as a nitric oxide enhancer and an antioxidant, and helps to prevent tolerance to the prolonged use of nitrate. The hemodynamic effects of the combination drug in heart failure includes increased cardiac output. The US Food and Drug Administration approved the combination of isosorbide dinitrate based on the African-American Heart Failure Trial. Further clinical trials utilizing isosorbide dinitrate will hopefully determine the benefit of this combination in a larger population, including caucasians and other racial/ethnic groups.
BACKGROUND: Pre-eclampsia is one of the most serious and common complications of pregnancy. Nifedipine, a calcium channel blocker, and the vasodilator hydralazine have both been used as antihypertensive agents in this condition. The aim of this study was to determine which of these two agents is the most appropriate antihypertensive in the management of severe pre-eclampsia. METHODS: One hundred and twenty-six pre-eclamptic patients with a gestational age of more than 20 weeks were randomized to receive either 8 mg nifedipine sublingually or 5-10 mg intravenous hydralazine. Women with a history of heart failure and women receiving antihypertensive treatment during the course of the current pregnancy were excluded. For each patient the following data were recorded; the number of drug administrations, the time needed to control blood pressure, mean urinary output, the time interval between effective control and a new hypertensive crisis after each drug administration and relevant adverse effects in mother or fetus. RESULTS: Effective control of blood pressure was achieved in both treatment arms. Data analysis indicated significantly fewer drug administrations in the nifedipine arm of the study. The time interval before a new hypertensive crisis following initial effective control of blood pressure was significantly longer in the nifedipine group when compared with hydralazine. Effective control of blood pressure was achieved more rapidly in multiparous patients receiving nifedipine (p=0.026). Mean urinary output before and after delivery was greater in the nifedipine arm of the study. There were no significant differences between the two groups in other variables. In addition, in neither group were there any serious adverse effects in mother or fetus. CONCLUSION: Nifedipine is safe and more effective than hydralazine in controlling blood pressure in severe pre-eclampsia. It has the added advantage of being cheaper and more widely available than the latter and is easily administered.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Hydralazine is an inhibitor of DNA methyltransferases, whereas valproate interferes with histone deacetylation. In combination, they show a marked synergism in reducing tumour growth as well as development of metastasis and inducing cell differentiation. Hydralazine is metabolized by the highly polymorphic N-acetyltransferase 2. The current pilot study was performed to analyse the pharmacokinetic parameters of a single dose of hydralazine in 24 h (one tablet with 83 mg for slow acetylators and one tablet with 182 mg for fast acetylators) and three fixed doses of valproate (one tablet of controlled liberation with 700 mg every 8 h) in healthy genetically selected volunteers. Selection was performed based on their NAT2 activity as deduced from their genotype. METHODS: An open label non-randomized single arm study was conducted in two groups of six healthy volunteers of both genders aged 20-45 years with a body mass index 22.2-26.9 which were classified as fast or slow acetylators after genotyping 3 SNPs that cover 99.9% of the NAT2 variants in the Mexican population. Blood samples were collected predose and serially post-dose in an interval of 48 h. Hydralazine and valproate concentrations were determined by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled to tandem mass spectroscopy (MS/MS). RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The AUC0-48 h and Cmax of hydralazine were almost identical (1410 +/- 560 vs. 1446 +/- 509 ng h/mL and 93.4 +/- 16.7 vs. 112.5 +/- 42.1 ng/mL) in both groups with NAT2 genotype-adjusted doses, whereas the multidose parameters of valproate were not significantly affected neither by the selection of the NAT2 genotype (AUC0-48 h 2064 +/- 455 vs. 1896 +/- 185 mug h/mL; Cmax 96.4 +/- 21.1 vs. 88.8 +/- 7.2 mug/mL, for the fast and slow acetylators, respectively) nor the co-administration of 83 or 182 mg of hydralazine. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: Comparable hydralazine exposures (differences in AUC0-inf of only 7%) were observed in this study with genetic selection of volunteers and concomitant dose adjustment. However, the conclusions have yet to be confirmed with a full-powered 2 x 2 crossover study.
BACKGROUND: Despite its approval in 1953, hydralazine hydrochloride continues to be used in the management of resistant hypertension, a condition frequently managed by nephrologists and other clinicians. Hydralazine hydrochloride undergoes metabolism by the N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) enzyme. NAT2 is highly polymorphic as approximately 50% of the general population are slow acetylators. In this review, we first evaluate the link between NAT2 genotype and phenotype. We then assess the evidence available for genotype-guided therapy of hydralazine, specifically addressing associations of NAT2 acetylator status with hydralazine pharmacokinetics, antihypertensive efficacy, and toxicity. SUMMARY: There is a critical need to use hydralazine in some patients with resistant hypertension. Available evidence supports a significant link between genotype and NAT2 enzyme activity as 29 studies were identified with an overall concordance between genotype and phenotype of 92%. The literature also supports an association between acetylator status and hydralazine concentration, as fourteen of fifteen identified studies revealed significant relationships with a consistent direction of effect. Although fewer studies are available to directly link acetylator status with hydralazine antihypertensive efficacy, the evidence from this smaller set of studies is significant in 7 of 9 studies identified. Finally, 5 studies were identified which support the association of acetylator status with hydralazine-induced lupus. Clinicians should maintain vigilance when prescribing maximum doses of hydralazine. Key Messages: NAT2 slow acetylator status predicts increased hydralazine levels, which may lead to increased efficacy and adverse effects. Caution should be exercised in slow acetylators with total daily hydralazine doses of 200 mg or more. Fast acetylators are at risk for inefficacy at lower doses of hydralazine. With appropriate guidance on the usage of NAT2 genotype, clinicians can adopt a personalized approach to hydralazine dosing and prescription, enabling more efficient and safe treatment of resistant hypertension.
INTRODUCTION: Hypertensive disorders during pregnancy elevate the likelihood of unfavorable outcomes for both mother and fetus. In cases of acute hypertension, several pharmacological interventions are available to lower blood pressure, such as hydralazine, a direct arteriolar vasodilator, and labetalol, a combined alpha and beta-blocker. OBJECTIVES: This systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) aims to compare the efficacy and safety of intravenous labetalol and intravenous hydralazine for acute hypertensive disorders during pregnancy. METHODS: We systematically searched PubMed, Embase and Cochrane for studies comparing labetalol versus hydralazine in pregnant patients. The primary outcomes were median arterial blood pressure (MABP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP) and systolic blood pressure (SBP). We performed statistical analyses using R 4.1.1. Heterogeneity was examined with the Cochran Q test and I(2) statistics. Risk ratios (RR) and mean differences (MD) with 95% confidence intervals (CI), were computed with a random-effects model. RESULTS: Nineteen RCTs were included in this meta-analysis, comprising 2,261 patients. Among them, 1,131 (50 %) received treatment with labetalol. There was no statistically significant difference between groups in terms of SBP (MD -1.74; 95 % CI -6.72 to 3.23; p = 0.49; I(2) = 93 %), MABP (MD -0.72; 95 % CI -2.34 to 0.90; p = 0.39; I(2) = 0 %), DBP (MD 0.25; 95 % CI -4.72 to 5.21; p = 0.92; I(2) = 96 %), tachycardia (RR 0.42; 95 % CI 0.15 to 1.18; p = 0.099; I(2) = 41 %), and placenta abruption (RR 0.42; 95 % CI 0.15 to 1.16; p = 0.093; I(2) = 0 %). However, labetalol significantly reduced maternal hypotension (RR 0.26; 95 % CI 0.21 to 0.33; p < 0.001; I(2) = 41 %) compared with hydralazine. CONCLUSION: This systematic review and meta-analysis of RCTs found that labetalol and hydralazine were efficient for hypertension disorders in pregnancy. However, labetalol reduced the incidence of maternal hypotension.
Twenty-three out-patients with mild or moderate essential hypertension have been treated with a combination of hydralazine (37.5-150 mg daily) and oxprenolol (60 mg daily). Before treatment the patients were phenotyped for polymorphic acetylation by means of the sulphamethazine test: 12 proved to be slow and 11 rapid acetylators. A significant correlation was found between daily doses of hydralazine and the plasma hydralazine levels, separately in slow (r=0.480) and in rapid (r=0.580) acetylators. The antihypertensive response to hydralazine correlated well to plasma hydralazine levels. The mean fall of BP in slow acetylators was 33/23 mmHg in supine and 20/18 mmHg in standing position. The corresponding values in rapid acetylators were 22/15 and 21/15 mmHg. The average daily doses of hydralazine needed for these responses were 1.3 mg/kg in slow and 1.6 mg/kg in rapid acetylators. To reduce the systolic BP by 20 mmHg, 1.0 mg/kg of hydralazine was needed in slow acetylators; rapid acetylators needed a significantly higher dose of 1.4 mg/kg. During a follow-upof 1 year there have been virtually no side-effects. The results tally with the previous finding of Zacest and Koch-Weser, who demonstrated a similar correlation during the triple-drug regimen. It seems as if hypertensive patients can be succesfully treated with hydralazine and beta-blocking drug without knowledge of the patient's acetylator phenotype. However, acetylator status is a determinant of tissue levels and long-term toxicity of hydralazine, and patients should be phenotyped because beta-blockers may mask the warning side-effects.
The vasodepressor response to single and multiple oral doses of hydralazine, 1 mg/kg, was studied in hypertensive patients. The concentration of hydralazine in plasma was measured both by a newly developed specific and a nonspecific assay similar to those used in previous studies. Acetylator phenotype was determined following oral sulfamethazine. Plasma hydralazine concentration peaked at 1 hour after administration and was undetectable 2 hours later. Apparent hydralazine was present in plasma in higher concentration and for a longer duration than hydralazine. The peak decreases in blood pressure (BP) were proportional to plasma hydralazine concentration following administration of both single and multiple doses and were substantially maintained for 8 hours. In contrast there was no significant correlation between decreases in BP and apparent hydralazine concentrations. The plasma concentration of hydralazine after a standard oral dose varied by as much as 15-fold among individuals and was lower in rapid than slow acetylator phenotype patients. The BP responses were positively correlated with plasma hydralazine concentrations and inversely correlated with acetylator indices. Low plasma concentrations may account for poor responses of some patients to conventional oral doses of hydralazine. The applicability of acetylator phenotyping for individualization of hydralazine dosage regimens merits further evaluation.
A 59-year-old man was diagnosed as having constrictive pericarditis 17 months after a typical hydralazine-induced autoimmune syndrome. This late complication of hydralazine has been reported only once. Ten years later the patient was found to have anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies directed against myeloperoxidase.
