Chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) are derivatives of the heterocyclic aromatic compound quinoline. These economical compounds have been used as antimalarial agents for many years. Currently, they are used as monotherapy or in conjunction with other therapies for the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjogren's syndrome (SS) and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS). Based on its effects on the modulation of the autophagy process, various clinical studies suggest that CQ and HCQ could be used in combination with other chemotherapeutics for the treatment of various types of cancer. Furthermore, the antiviral effects showed against Zika, Chikungunya, and HIV are due to the annulation of endosomal/lysosomal acidification. Recently, CQ and HCQ were approved for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of infected patients with the coronavirus SARSCoV- 2, causing the disease originated in December 2019, namely COVID-2019. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the pharmacological effects of these drugs: 1) disruption of lysosomal and endosomal pH, 2) inhibition of protein secretion/expression, 3) inhibition of antigen presentation, 4) decrease of proinflammatory cytokines, 5) inhibition of autophagy, 6) induction of apoptosis and 7) inhibition of ion channels activation. Thus, evidence has shown that these structures are leading molecules that can be modified or combined with other therapeutic agents. In this review, we will discuss the most recent findings in the mechanisms of action of CQ and HCQ in the immune system, and the use of these antimalarial drugs on diseases.
As of April 21, 2020, more than 2.5 million cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, have been reported in 210 countries and territories, with the death toll at 171,810. Both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have gained considerable media attention as possible therapies, resulting in a significant surge in demand. In overdose, both medications can cause severe, potentially life-threatening effects. Here, we present a brief overview of the pharmacology of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, manifestations of toxicity, and treatment considerations.
INTRODUCTION: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) has received much attention in the treatment of coronavirus disease 2019 recently. However, it can cause irreversible vision loss. Few cases have been reported in pediatric patient with HCQ-related adverse reactions. Appropriate administration and early disease recognition are important for reducing the adverse drug reactions of HCQ. PATIENT CONCERNS: We report a case of a 14-year-old Chinese girl who sought treatment for rapidly decreasing vision in the left eye over 3 days. The simulation results of the population pharmacokinetic model of HCQ revealed that the plasma concentration of HCQ abnormally increased before the visual acuity of the eye decreased. DIAGNOSIS: She was diagnosed as HCQ related drug adverse reaction. INTERVENTIONS: The daily dose of HCQ for this patient was adjusted from 100 mg/d to 50 mg/d. OUTCOMES: Follow-up for 6 months showed no more vision loss recurrence. However, the existing decreased visual acuity of the eye did not recover either. CONCLUSION: Although decreased visual acuity is an infrequent symptom, ophthalmologists should be aware of the possibility of HCQ concentration enrichment and consider minimizing HCQ use when a child with renal hypofunction seeks treatment for shortsightedness.
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ; Plaquenil) is used increasingly in the management of a variety of autoimmune disorders, with well established roles in dermatology and rheumatology and emerging roles in oncology. Hydroxychloroquine has demonstrated a survival benefit in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus; some clinicians advocate its use in all such patients. However, Hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine (CQ) have been associated with irreversible visual loss due to retinal toxicity. Hydroxychloroquine retinal toxicity is far more common than previously considered; an overall prevalence of 7.5% was identified in patients taking HCQ for greater than 5 years, rising to almost 20% after 20 years of treatment. This review aims to provide an update on HCQ/CQ retinopathy. We summarise emerging treatment indications and evidence of efficacy in systemic disease, risk factors for retinopathy, prevalence among HCQ users, diagnostic tests, and management of HCQ retinopathy. We highlight emerging risk factors such as tamoxifen use, and new guidance on safe dosing, reversing the previous recommendation to use ideal body weight, rather than actual body weight. We summarise uncertainties and the recommendations made by existing HCQ screening programmes. Asian patients with HCQ retinopathy may demonstrate an extramacular or pericentral pattern of disease; visual field testing and retinal imaging should include a wider field for screening in this group. HCQ is generally safe and effective for the treatment of systemic disease but because of the risk of HCQ retinal toxicity, modern screening methods and ideal dosing should be implemented. Guidelines regarding optimal dosing and screening regarding HCQ need to be more widely disseminated.
At the end of last century a prominent biochemist once opened the discussion of a controversial issue in the field of Bioenergetics with the following statement: "This is a long story, that shouldn't be long, but it will take a long time to make it short". As it happens, such a statement would apply perfectly well to the story of chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) in the COVID-19 infection: it has become a veritable saga, with conflicting views that have often gone beyond the normal scientific dialectic, and with conclusions that have frequently been polluted by non scientific opinions: thus, for instance, when National Agencies have taken positions against CQ and HCQ, the move has been seen as a pro-vaccine attempt to block low cost therapy means. And it is difficult to avoid the feeling that the opposition to CQ and HCQ has in large measure been shaped not by scientific arguments, but by the fact that their use has been strongly endorsed by National leaders whose popularity among Western intellectuals is extremely low. The role of the two drugs in the COVID-19 infection thus deserves an objective analysis solely based on scientific facts. This contribution will attempt to produce it.
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are quinoline derivatives used to treat malaria. To date, these medications are not approved for the treatment of viral infections, and there are no well-controlled, prospective, randomized clinical studies or evidence to support their use in patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Nevertheless, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are being studied alone or in combination with other agents to assess their effectiveness in the treatment or prophylaxis for COVID-19. The effective use of any medication involves an understanding of its pharmacokinetics, safety, and mechanism of action. This work provides basic clinical pharmacology information relevant for planning and initiating COVID-19 clinical studies with chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine, summarizes safety data from healthy volunteer studies, and summarizes safety data from phase II and phase II/III clinical studies in patients with uncomplicated malaria, including a phase II/III study in pediatric patients following administration of azithromycin and chloroquine in combination. In addition, this work presents data describing the proposed mechanisms of action against the severe acute respiratory distress syndrome coronavirus-2 and summarizes clinical efficacy to date.
BACKGROUND: There is no effective therapy for COVID-19. Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and chloroquine (CQ) have been used for its treatment but their safety and efficacy remain uncertain. OBJECTIVE: We performed a systematic review to synthesize the available data on the efficacy and safety of CQ and HCQ for the treatment of COVID-19. METHODS: Two reviewers searched for published and pre-published relevant articles between December 2019 and 8 June 2020. The data from the selected studies were abstracted and analyzed for efficacy and safety outcomes. Critical appraisal of the evidence was done by Cochrane risk of bias tool and Newcastle Ottawa Scale. The quality of evidence was graded as per the GRADE approach. RESULTS: We reviewed 12 observational and 3 randomized trials which included 10,659 patients of whom 5713 received CQ/HCQ and 4966 received only standard of care. The efficacy of CQ/HCQ for COVID-19 was inconsistent across the studies. Meta-analysis of included studies revealed no significant reduction in mortality with HCQ use [RR 0.98 95% CI 0.66-1.46], time to fever resolution (mean difference - 0.54 days (- 1.19-011)) or clinical deterioration/development of ARDS with HCQ [RR 0.90 95% CI 0.47-1.71]. There was a higher risk of ECG abnormalities/arrhythmia with HCQ/CQ [RR 1.46 95% CI 1.04 to 2.06]. The quality of evidence was graded as very low for these outcomes. AUTHORS' CONCLUSION: The available evidence suggests that CQ or HCQ does not improve clinical outcomes in COVID-19. Well-designed randomized trials are required for assessing the efficacy and safety of HCQ and CQ for COVID-19.
The efficacy and safety of hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) for the prevention and treatment of COVID-19 has received great attention, and most notably, the enthusiasm for HCQ has been one of politicization rather than science. Laboratory studies and case series published early in the pandemic supported its efficacy. The scientific community raced to conduct observational and randomized evaluations of the drug in all stages of the disease, including prophylaxis, early treatment, and advanced disease. Yet a divisive media response affected recruitment, funding, and subsequent enthusiasm for continuing scientific investigations. Of the more than 300 HCQ trials registered, fewer than 50% report having recruited any patients, and most trials might fail to achieve any useful portions of their intended sample size. Multiple observational studies and two large randomized trials have demonstrated HCQ does not offer efficacy against COVID-19 in hospitalized patients. Prophylaxis studies and early treatment studies provided heterogeneous results and are plagued by low event rates and poor study outcome monitoring. Emerging high-quality evaluations of prophylaxis and early treatment do not support a role for HCQ in these populations. The story of HCQ for COVID-19 has followed a pattern of initial enthusiasm supported by poor quality evidence, followed by disappointment based on more rigorous evaluations. The experience of HCQ in the COVID-19 era calls for the depoliticization of science away from media glare.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to evaluate the high-quality literature on the frequency and nature of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) associated with either hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) or chloroquine (CQ). DATA SOURCES: We searched Medline, Embase, International Pharmaceutical Abstracts, and Cochrane Central from 1996 onward using search strategies created in collaboration with medical science librarians. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) published in English language from January 1996 to September 2022, involving adult patients at least 18 years of age, were selected. Outcomes of interest were death, arrhythmias, syncope, and seizures. Random-effects meta-analyses were performed with a Treatment Arm Continuity Correction for single and double zero event studies. DATA SYNTHESIS: By study drug, there were 31 HCQ RCTs (n = 6677), 9 CQ RCTs (n = 622), and 1 combined HCQ-CQ trial (n = 105). Mortality was the most commonly reported MACE at 220 of 255 events (86.3%), with no reports of torsades de pointes or sudden cardiac death. There was no increased risk of MACE with exposure to HCQ-CQ compared with control (risk ratio [RR] = 0.90, 95% CI = 0.69-1.17, I(2) = 0%). RELEVANCE TO PATIENT CARE AND CLINICAL PRACTICE: These findings have important implications with respect to patient reassurance and updated guidance for prescribing practices of these medications. CONCLUSIONS: Despite listing as QT-prolonging meds, HCQ-CQ did not increase the risk of MACE.
BACKGROUND: Hydroxychloroquine is a treatment for rheumatic disease and considered safe during pregnancy. Interest in hydroxychloroquine has increased as it is being examined as a potential treatment and prophylaxis for coronavirus disease 2019. Data on the risks of specific birth defects associated with hydroxychloroquine use are sparse. METHODS: Using data from two case-control studies (National Birth Defects Prevention Study and Slone Epidemiology Center Birth Defects Study), we described women who reported hydroxychloroquine use in pregnancy and the presence of specific major birth defects in their offspring. Cases had at least one major birth defect and controls were live-born healthy infants. Women self-reported medication use information in the few months before pregnancy through delivery. RESULTS: In total, 0.06% (19/31,468) of case and 0.04% (5/11,614) of control mothers in National Birth Defects Prevention Study, and 0.04% (11/29,838) of case and 0.05% (7/12,868) of control mothers in Birth Defects Study reported hydroxychloroquine use. Hydroxychloroquine users had complicated medical histories and frequent medication use for a variety of conditions. The observed birth defects among women taking hydroxychloroquine were varied and included nine oral cleft cases; the elevated observed:expected ratios for specific oral cleft phenotypes and for oral clefts overall had 95% confidence intervals that included 1.0. CONCLUSION: While teratogens typically produce a specific pattern of birth defects, the observed birth defects among the hydroxychloroquine-exposed women did not present a clear pattern, suggesting no meaningful evidence for the risk of specific birth defects. The number of exposed cases is small; results should be interpreted cautiously.
Initially used as antimalarial drugs, hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and, to a lesser extent, chloroquine (CQ) are currently being used to treat several diseases. Due to its cost-effectiveness, safety and efficacy, HCQ is especially used in rheumatic autoimmune disorders (RADs), such as systemic lupus erythematosus, primary Sjogren's syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis. Despite this widespread use in the clinic, HCQ molecular modes of action are still not completely understood. By influencing several cellular pathways through different mechanisms, CQ and HCQ inhibit multiple endolysosomal functions, including autophagy, as well as endosomal Toll-like receptor activation and calcium signalling. These effects alter several aspects of the immune system with the synergistic consequence of reducing pro-inflammatory cytokine production and release, one of the most marked symptoms of RADs. Here, we review the current knowledge on the molecular modes of action of these drugs and the circumstances under which they trigger side effects. This is of particular importance as the therapeutic use of HCQ is expanding beyond the treatment of malaria and RADs.
The unique immunomodulatory properties of hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) have attracted considerable interest beyond its use for malaria and rheumatological diseases, including a variety of dermatological conditions. Over recent years, especially after the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, the prescription of HCQ has also significantly expanded, sometimes inappropriately, thus posing additional challenges on its optimal use, due to emerging safety issues. In this review, we provide dermatologists with the latest advancements on selected clinically relevant toxicities, namely retinopathy, pro-arrhythmia, cutaneous reactions, and neuropsychiatric effects. It is hoped this update can assist dermatologists to identify high-risk patients for tailored monitoring, screening, and risk minimization strategies, thus supporting safer HCQ prescribing.
Chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) are the most common drugs used to relieve acute and chronic inflammatory diseases. In this article, we present a review about the use of CQ and HCQ in antitumor therapies based on autophagy mechanisms. These molecules break/discontinue autophagosome-lysosome fusions in initial phases and enhance antiproliferative action of chemotherapeutics. Their sensitizing effects of chemotherapy when used as an adjuvant option in clinical trials against cancer. However, human related-MDR genes are also under risk to develop chemo or radioresistance because cancer cells have ability to throw 4-aminoquinolines out from digestive vacuoles well. Additionally, they also have antitumor mechanism unrelated to autophagy, including cell death from apoptosis and necroptosis and immunomodulatory/anti-inflammatory properties. However, the link between some anticancer mechanisms, clinical efficacy and pharmacological safety has not yet been fully defined.
Repurposing of antirheumatic drugs has garnered global attention. The aim of this article is to overview available evidence on the use of widely used antirheumatic drugs hydroxychloroquine, methotrexate and colchicine for additional indications. Hydroxychloroquine has endothelial stabilizing and anti-thrombotic effects. Its use has been explored as an adjunctive therapy in refractory thrombosis in antiphospholipid syndrome. It may also prevent recurrent pregnancy losses in the absence of antiphospholipid antibodies. Hydroxychloroquine favourably modulates atherogenic lipid and glycaemic profiles. Methotrexate has been tried for modulation of cardiovascular events in non-rheumatic clinical conditions, although a large clinical trial failed to demonstrate a benefit. Colchicine has been shown to successfully reduce the risk of recurrent cardiovascular events in a large multicentric trial. Potential antifibrotic effects of colchicine require further exploration. Hydroxychloroquine, methotrexate and colchicine are also being tried at different stages of the ongoing Coronavirus Disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic for prophylaxis and treatment. While the use of these agents is being diversified, their adverse effects should be timely diagnosed and prevented. Hydroxychloroquine can cause retinopathy and rarely cardiac and auditory toxicity, retinopathy being dose and time dependent. Methotrexate can cause transaminitis, cytopenias and renal failure, particularly in acute overdoses. Colchicine can rarely cause myopathies, cardiomyopathy, cytopenias and transaminitis. Strong evidence is warranted to keep balance between benefits of repurposing these old antirheumatic drugs and risk of their adverse effects.
BACKGROUND: Since COVID-19 outbreak, hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) has been tested for effective therapies, and the relevant researches have shown controversial results. METHODS: Systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted after a thorough search of relevant studies from databases. Trials that have evaluated HCQ for COVID-19 treatment were recruited for statistical analysis with fixed- and random-effect models. RESULTS: Nine trials involving 4112 patients were included in present meta-analysis. It was seen that HCQ-azithromycin (HCQ-AZI) combination regimen increased the mortality rate in COVID-19 (odds ratio [OR], 2.34; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.63-3.36) patients; however, it also showed benefits associated with the viral clearance in patients (OR, 27.18; 95% CI, 1.29-574.32). HCQ-alone when used as a therapy in COVID-19 did not reveal significant changes in mortality rate, clinical progression, viral clearance, and cardiac QT prolongation. Subsequent subgroup analysis showed that HCQ treatment could decrease mortality rate and progression to severe illness in severely infected COVID-19 patients (OR, 0.27; 95% CI, 0.13-0.58). A lower risk of mortality rate was also noted in the stratified group of >14 days follow-up period (OR, 0.27; 95% CI, 0.13-0.58) compared to </=14 days follow-up period group that conversely showed an increased mortality rate (OR, 2.09; 95% CI, 1.41-3.10). CONCLUSION: Our results indicated that HCQ-AZI combination treatment increased mortality rate in patients with COVID-19, but it also showed benefits associated with viral clearance in patients. HCQ-alone used for treatment has revealed benefits in decreasing the mortality rate among severely infected COVID-19 group and showed potential to be used for COVID-19 treatment in long-term follow-up period group. Accordingly, more rigorous, large-scale, and long follow-up period studies in patients with COVID-19 are needed.
