Background and Objectives: Hydroxyurea is a crucial treatment for sickle cell disease (SCD), but some patients' adherence to it remains suboptimal. Understanding patients' perspectives on SCD and HU is essential for improving adherence. This study aimed to assess hydroxyurea adherence and patients' perceptions of SCD and hydroxyurea among SCD patients in the Jazan region of Saudi Arabia. Materials and Methods: This cross-sectional study collected data from 217 SCD patients using self-administered questionnaires from August 2022 to January 2023. The survey covered patient demographics, SCD consequences, and other clinical data. We used the Brief Illness Perception Questionnaire (B-IPQ) to measure patients' disease perception and the 8-item Morisky Medication Adherence Scale (MMAS-8) to evaluate patients' adherence to HU. Data were analysed using descriptive, t-test, and chi-square tests, and the p-value was set at <0.05 for significance. Results: More than half of the patients were male, with a mean age of 28.09 +/- 8.40 years. About 57.6% of the patients were currently using HU. About 81.6% of HU users reported low adherence. The adherence was lower among individuals with infections/recurrent infections and in patients who received repeated blood transfusions. ICU admission, blood transfusion, and certain SCD complications were associated with HU use. Male patients had a higher perception of SCD consequences, concern, and understanding. ICU-admitted and recurrent hospitalized patients had a higher perception of the SCD-related consequences, symptoms, concerns, and emotional responses. Conclusions: HU seems a well-established and efficacious disease-modifying agent, but its underutilization for SCD patients remains challenging. To overcome the adherence challenges, healthcare providers must educate SCD patients about the role of hydroxyurea in lowering disease severity and addressing side effects to obtain maximum benefits. Healthcare providers may consider tailored educational interventions to improve adherence, particularly for patients with infections, recurrent hospitalizations, or repeated blood transfusions. Further research is needed to identify strategies for improving hydroxyurea adherence and patient education among SCD patients.
Hydroxyurea (HU) alone has the potential to prevent one out of every three deaths due to sickle cell disease (SCD) and almost all forms of disabilities caused by SCD. However, in Tanzania, only one out of every six registered SCD patients in the SPARCO-Tanzania Sickle Cell Cohort use HU. We conducted studies to understand factors influencing utilization of HU in Tanzania and discovered that among the reason for low utilization of HU include HU is classified as anticancer medication, only hematologists are supposed to prescribe HU, limited HU prescription to only National and Specialized hospitals, a special permit is required to access HU using National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF) scheme and limited importation and absence of local manufacturing of HU limit availability of this important drug in Tanzania. Therefore, with this brief, the government should allow prescription of HU to the district hospitals level, should allow all clinicians with a minimum of a Bachelor of Medicine to prescribe HU, and accessibility of HU through NHIF should be friendly.
Hydroxyurea (HU) is an effective drug to increase fetal gamma-globin gene (Hb F) expression, replacing the missing adult beta-globin gene. The mechanism of Hb F induction by HU and improvement in clinical symptoms are still poorly understood. The current study aimed to improve the molecular understanding of drug-induced alterations and reveals genes related to HU treatment responsiveness in beta-thalassemia (beta-thal). We analyzed the GSE109186 dataset using system biology and weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) to identify and quantify gene expression changes reflected in the HU-treated human erythroblastic leukemia cells. The K562 cell line was treated in 50, 100, and 150 microM concentrations of HU for 24, 48, and 72 hours with three replications. The alteration of CA1, LIN28B and Hb F gene expression in HU-treated cells was evaluated using the real-time polymerase chain (real-time PCR) technique. The results showed that LIN28B has an increase of 4.27-fold on the first day of HU-treatment in 50 microM (p < 0.01). The CA1 expression showed a decrease at all times and doses of treatment, and the most decrease happened in 48 hours and 50 microM (p < 0.04). Hb F also showed the highest increase in 100 microM after 24 hours of treatment (5.18-fold). In summary, the data suggest that alteration of LIN28B and CA1 gene expression is associated with gamma-globin increasing in HU-treated cells.
The novel hydroxyurea 5 derivative of L-valine was prepared by aminolysis of N-(1-benzotriazolecarbonyl)-L-valine cyclohexanemethylamide 4 with hydroxylamine. The corresponding hydantoin derivative 6 was synthesized by base catalyzed cyclization of the amide 4. The exact stereostructure of hydantoin derivative 6 has been determined by X-ray crystal structure analysis. The chiral atom of the hydantoin ring in 6 has S configuration what is in agreement with its configuration in the starting L-valine. The molecules of 6 are joined into infinite chains by N-H...O intermolecular hydrogen bond. The infinite chains are additionally linked by two C-H...O hydrogen bonds, thus forming two-dimensional network. The hydantoin derivative of L-valine 6 and its L-leucine analogue LH have similar packing arrangements, so they are homostructural.
Two novel dual functional agents, 3[3-(2,4-dinitro-phenylamino)-propyl]-5-fluoro-1H-pyrimidine-2,4-dione 7 and N-[3-(2,4-dinitro-phenylamino)-propoxy]urea 8, resulting from linkage of 2,4-dinitrophenylamine through three carbon atoms with 5-fluorouracil 5 and hydroxyurea 6, respectively, were prepared and their in vitro aerobic cytotoxicities in HT-29 cell line with and without radiation were determined. Compounds 7 and 8 unlike their components were not cytotoxic but showed radiosensitizing activity.
INTRODUCTION: Approximately one-quarter of patients with polycythemia vera become resistant to and/or intolerant of hydroxyurea. This analysis characterizes reasons patients were switched from hydroxyurea to ruxolitinib and describes ruxolitinib dosing patterns and outcomes in real-world clinical practice. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This medical chart review of United States community hematology/oncology practices in the Cardinal Health Oncology Provider Extended Network included patients with polycythemia vera who were >/=18 years old, received hydroxyurea for >/=3 months, started ruxolitinib between January 1, 2015 and December 31, 2016, and had >/=2 visits during the subsequent 6 months. Clinical data were collected at predefined intervals from diagnosis to last provider visit. RESULTS: Providers identified 249 patients for inclusion. jcauses of hydroxyurea discontinuation were resistance (78%; frequently for hematocrit >/=45% [79%]) and intolerance (28%; frequently for nausea/vomiting [50%]). Initial ruxolitinib dosing was 10 mg twice daily (recommended dose) in 131 patients (53%). Among these patients, median treatment duration was 29.2 months, 35 (27%) had dose modification (increase, n = 24; decrease, n = 11) and 4 had interruptions within 6 months. The most common reason for dose increase was continued need for phlebotomy (46%); 6 patients had dose reductions owing to reduced platelets. Hematocrit control at initiation and during the first 6 months of ruxolitinib treatment was 15% and 63%, respectively. CONCLUSION: Most patients initiated ruxolitinib upon hydroxyurea resistance. Approximately half initiated ruxolitinib at the recommended dose, 27% of whom experienced dosing modifications within the first 6 months. After switching to ruxolitinib, most patients achieved hematocrit control and continued treatment for extended time frames.
Hydroxyurea is FDA-approved and now increasingly used for children with sickle cell anemia (SCA), but dosing strategies, pharmacokinetic (PK) profiles, and treatment responses for individual patients are highly variable. Typical weight-based dosing with step-wise escalation to maximum tolerated dose (MTD) leads to predictable laboratory and clinical benefits, but often takes 6 to 12 months to achieve. The Therapeutic Response Evaluation and Adherence Trial (TREAT, NCT02286154) was a single-center study designed to prospectively validate a novel personalized PK-guided hydroxyurea dosing strategy with a primary endpoint of time to MTD. Enrolled participants received a single oral 20 mg/kg dose of hydroxyurea, followed by a sparse PK sampling approach with three samples collected over three hours. Analysis of individual PK data into a population PK model generated a starting dose that targets the MTD. The TREAT cohort (n = 50) was young, starting hydroxyurea at a median age of 11 months (IQR 9-26 months), and PK-guided starting doses were high (27.7 +/- 4.9 mg/kg/d). Time to MTD was 4.8 months (IQR 3.3-9.3), significantly shorter than comparison studies (p < 0.0001), thus meeting the primary endpoint. More remarkably, the laboratory response for participants starting with a PK-guided dose was quite robust, achieving higher hemoglobin (10.1 +/- 1.3 g/dL) and HbF (33.3 +/- 9.1%) levels than traditional dosing. Though higher than traditional dosing, PK-guided doses were safe without excess hematologic toxicities. Our data suggest early initiation of hydroxyurea, using a personalized dosing strategy for children with SCA, provides laboratory and clinical response beyond what has been seen historically, with traditional weight-based dosing.
Tumor targeting of glycoconjugated antineoplastic agents is a strategy currently under investigation for cancer chemotherapy. We have synthesized the glucosides and galactosides of the clinically established drug hydroxyurea and of mesylglycol, the reactive moiety of the anticancer drug busulfan. Glycosides of hydroxyurea were obtained by carbamoylation of hydroxylamine glycosides. The glycosides of mesylglycol were synthesized by mesylation of protected glycol glycosides. All compounds were characterized by detailed 1H and 13C NMR analysis.
The Multicenter Study of Hydroxyurea in Sickle Cell Anemia (MSH) was a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial to test whether hydroxyurea could reduce the rate of painful crises in adults who had at least 3 painful crises per year. Because hydroxyurea is known to be carcinogenic, mutagenic, and teratogenic in animals, a major inclusion criterion in MSH was the use of contraceptives both by females and males in order to avoid exposure of the fetus to hydroxyurea. Despite this precautionary measure, some women became pregnant while taking hydroxyurea or their male partners were on hydroxyurea. We followed surviving patients who were enrolled in the original MSH trial for up to 17 years postrandomization. Our findings suggest that exposure of the fetus to hydroxyurea does not cause teratogenic changes in those pregnancies that terminate in live birth whether full-term or premature. This seems to be true whether the parent taking hydroxyurea was the mother or the father. The same argument seems to apply for exposure to opioids. However, it will take a much longer follow-up of many more hydroxyurea-exposed sickle cell disease subjects to establish the results conclusively.
Neurocognitive impairment is common in sickle cell disease (SCD) and is associated with significant functional limitations. In a cross-sectional analysis, we examined the association between hydroxyurea (HU) treatment and neurocognitive functioning from school-age to young adulthood in individuals with SCD. A total of 215 patients with HbSS/HbSbeta(0) -thalassaemia (71% HU treated) and 149 patients with HbSC/HbSbeta(+) -thalassaemia (20% HU treated) completed neurocognitive measures at one of four developmental stages: school-age (age 8-9 years), early adolescence (age 12-13 years), late adolescence (age 16-17 years) and young adulthood (ages 19-24 years). For participants with multiple assessments, only the most recent evaluation was included. In multivariable analysis adjusted for social vulnerability, HU treatment and sex, older age was associated with a reduction in overall intelligence quotient (IQ) of 0.55 points per year of life [standard error (SE) = 0.18, false discovery rate adjusted P value (PFDR) = 0.01] for patients with HbSS/HbSbeta(0) -thalassaemia. Earlier initiation of HU (n = 152) in HbSS/HbSbeta(0) -thalassaemia was associated with higher scores on neurocognitive measures across most domains, including IQ [estimate (SE) 0.77 (0.25)/year, PFDR = 0.01], after adjusting for social vulnerability, sex and treatment duration. These results support the early use of HU to limit the detrimental neurocognitive effects of SCD, while highlighting the need for additional measures to further mitigate neurocognitive deterioration.
Hydroxyurea (HU) is being used for patients with transfusion-dependent beta-thalassemia major (beta-TM) as well as non transfusion-dependent beta-TM. As controversy exists regarding efficacy and safety of HU, we searched the published literature on efficacy, effectiveness and toxicity of HU in patients with beta-TM. The research sources we used were: Medline, SID, PubMed, Scopus, Request, Web of Knowledge, Springer, Ovid, Cochrane searched up to October 2012. Using search terms sensitive to studies of clinical trials combined with searches on terms related to thalassemia and HU. We selected studies on randomized trials, quasi experimental trials (before and after design), case reports (with 1-5 cases), side effect studies in patients with beta-TM, studies related to the mechanism of action and toxicity when used in patients with other hemoglobinopathies. We researched studies in English and Persian. Eligible articles were reviewed by two independent reviewers. Patient's characteristics, duration of trial, outcome and side effects were extracted. The main outcomes were synthesized under a random-effects model. Heterogeneity was assessed using the Q statistic, Tau(2) and I(2). Subgroup analyses were performed and the statistics data (STATA) software used. More than 500 articles were reviewed. No randomized clinical trial was found. Seventeen trials with before and after designs were found, 16 case reports (1-5 cases), 19 articles for mechanism of action and 16 studies for side effects were published from 1969 to October 2012. Hemoglobin levels after treatment showed modest but significant increase in non transfusion-dependent beta-TM (p < 0.0001) and in transfusion-dependent beta-TM (p < 0.0001).
