PURPOSE: To our knowledge from indexed literature, the present study is the first one to systematically review the influence of local delivery of pamidronate (PAM) and/or ibandronate (IBA) on osseointegration enhancement. The aim of the present systematic review was to assess the efficacy of IBA and/or PAM local delivery (topically or coating on implants surfaces) in promoting osseointegration. MATERIALS AND METHODS: To address the focused question, "Does local IBA and/or PAM delivery enhances osseointegration?," indexed databases were searched without time or language restrictions up to and including May 2016 using various combinations of the following keywords: "pamidronate," "ibandronate," "bisphosphonates," "osseointegration," and "topical administration." Letters to the Editor, historic reviews, commentaries, case series, and case reports were excluded. RESULTS: Fifteen studies were included. Fourteen studies were performed in animals and 2 were clinical trials. One study reported an experimental model and a clinical trial in the same publication. Results from 12 experimental studies and 2 clinical studies reported improved biomechanical properties and/or osseointegration around implants with PAM and/or IBA. Two experimental studies showed that PAM and/or IBA did not improve osseointegration. CONCLUSIONS: On experimental grounds, local IBA and/or PAM delivery seems to enhance osseointegration; however, from a clinical perspective, further randomized control trials are needed to assess the effectiveness of IBA and PAM in promoting osseointegration around dental implants.
Romosozumab is a potent drug for treating postmenopausal osteoporosis but has a limited dosing period of 12 months. Bone mineral density (BMD) decreases soon after romosozumab discontinuation, thus emphasizing the importance of appropriate sequential treatment. The present VICTOR randomized controlled study compared the efficacy of ibandronate and denosumab as sequential therapy options following 12-month romosozumab treatment. Subjects completing 12 months of romosozumab administration for severe postmenopausal osteoporosis were randomly assigned to receive either ibandronate or denosumab for an additional 12 months. The primary outcome of interest was the percentage changes in BMD at the lumbar spine, total hip, and femoral neck from 12 months (completion of romosozumab) to 18 and 24 months of total treatment (6 and 12 months, respectively, after the conversion to sequential therapy). Secondary outcomes included alterations in serum bone turnover markers and the incidence of adverse events. Sixty-two subjects each in the ibandronate and denosumab groups completed the sequential therapy. The respective percentage changes in BMD at the lumbar spine from 12 months to 24 months were 2.5 % in the ibandronate group and 5.4 % in the denosumab group. At 24 months, we observed significant differences versus 12 months for both groups as well as between the groups (all P < 0.01), showing a superior ability to increase BMD at the lumbar spine for denosumab over ibandronate. BMD gains at the total hip and femoral neck exhibited comparably favorable trends. P1NP and TRACP-5b were significantly decreased from 12 to 24 months (-64.9 % and - 26.8 % in the ibandronate group and - 67.4 % and - 36.3 % in the denosumab group, respectively; all P < 0.001 versus 12 months). Several minor adverse events were recorded in both groups, none of which led to the discontinuation of the trial. The VICTOR study revealed that denosumab could be considered more effective than ibandronate, with few severe adverse events, for the enhancement of BMD as a sequential agent after romosozumab in postmenopausal osteoporosis patients.
BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: This study aims to evaluate ibandronate clinical effectiveness in the prevention of osteoporosis-related vertebral fractures (VFs) and nonvertebral fractures (NVFs) in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. METHODS: This systematic review was conducted in accordance with the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination's guidance and reporting in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis statement 2020. A literature search was performed in PubMed and EMBASE since their inception until February 7, 2022. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs), meta-analysis, experimental, and observational studies evaluating adult patients treated with ibandronate and assessed to osteoporotic fractures prevention were included. The risk of bias was assessed according to study design. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics. RESULTS: Eight references from 4 RCTs, 7 meta-analyses, and 6 observational studies were included. In RCTs, oral ibandronate was superior to placebo in the prevention of VF. However, the doses were lower than those approved. The meta-analyses confirmed these results and showed that adequate doses of oral ibandronate reduce the risk of NVF compared with insufficient doses. In observational studies, oral ibandronate (in approved doses) reduced the risk of VF compared with no treatment or risedronate or alendronate and the risk of NVF versus risedronate or alendronate; the risk of hip fractures was similar between ibandronate and other oral bisphosphonates. CONCLUSIONS: There is strong evidence that ibandronate reduces the risk of VF in postmenopausal osteoporosis. The available evidence further suggests that ibandronate may reduce the risk of NVF versus insufficient doses of ibandronate, as well as risedronate or alendronate.
OBJECTIVE: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) have given contradictory results about the efficacy and safety of ibandronate in treating metastatic bone disease (MBD) or multiple myeloma. This review meta-analysed the literature to gain a more comprehensive picture. DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis of ibandronate compared with placebo or zoledronate. DATA SOURCES: PubMed, EMBASE and the Cochrane Library databases were systematically searched to identify RCTs published up to March 2015 evaluating ibandronate to treat MBD or multiple myeloma. REVIEW METHOD: 10 RCTs involving 3474 patients were included. Six RCTs were placebo-controlled and four compared ibandronate with zoledronate. The studies included in this review were mainly from European countries. RESULTS: Intravenous ibandronate (6 mg) or oral drug (50 mg) decreased the risk of skeletal-related events compared to placebo (risk ratio (RR) 0.80, 95% CI 0.71 to 0.90, p=0.002). It also reduced the bone pain score below baseline significantly more than did placebo at 96 weeks (weighted mean difference -0.41, 95% CI -0.56 to -0.27, p<0.001). The incidence of diarrhoea, nausea and adverse renal events was similar between the ibandronate and placebo groups, but ibandronate was associated with greater risk of abdominal pain. Ibandronate was associated with similar risk of skeletal-related events as another bisphosphonate drug, zoledronate (RR 1.02, 95% CI 0.82 to 1.26, p=0.87). The incidence of nausea, jaw osteonecrosis and fatigue was similar for the two drugs, but the incidence of adverse renal events was significantly lower in the ibandronate group. CONCLUSIONS: Ibandronate significantly reduces the incidence of skeletal-related events and bone pain in patients with MBD or multiple myeloma relative to placebo. It is associated with a similar incidence of skeletal-related events as zoledronate.
OBJECTIVES: The present study investigated osteoprotegerin (OPG) genetic polymorphisms and their influence on the therapeutic response to ibandronate in postmenopausal osteoporotic females. METHODS: This case-control study included 135 postmenopausal females (89 osteoporotic females and 46 non-osteoporotic females). Each osteoporotic patient received a monthly 150 mg ibandronate tablet for six months, and blood samples were taken before and after treatment. Bone mineral density (BMD) was measured using DEXA Scan. Three SNPs (A163G, T245G, and G1181C) of the OPG gene were selected for analysis. RESULTS: Serum OPG levels were significantly lower in osteoporotic subjects than in the control group. The percentage changes in OPG levels in the osteoporotic group before and after treatment with ibandronate were significant (p < .001). After six months of therapy with ibandronate, the percentage changes in OPG levels with AA, TT, TC, GC, and GG genotypes were significant. Following six months of ibandronate treatment, the AA genotype of rs3134069, TT, TC genotypes of rs3102735, GG, and GC genotypes of rs2073618 SNP showed a significant increase in OPG levels. Age, BMI, and GC polymorphism (rs2073618 (G/C) G1181C) were inversely associated with low BMD. Adjusted odds ratios (OR) showed that BMI, GC, GG polymorphism (rs2073618 (G/C) G1181C) and TC polymorphism (rs3102735 (T/C) A163G) were inversely associated with low BMD. CONCLUSION: The inverse association of rs2073618 and rs3102735 with low BMD indicates the protective role of these SNPs in our population. More research is needed to replicate these results in another cohort and to determine the molecular processes by which such SNPs may influence BMD.
BACKGROUND: Several reports suggest that adverse events caused by ibandronate are less serious than those associated with the other bisphosphonates. The purpose of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to determine whether ibandronate has low rates of serious adverse events and kidney injury. METHODS: Randomized controlled trials were selected, and the study populations consisted of adult patients with osteoporosis. The primary outcome was all serious adverse events and the secondary outcome was kidney injury. The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach was used to assess the quality of evidence. RESULTS: Nineteen studies were eligible for inclusion. No significant difference in the rate of serious adverse events or that of kidney injury was found between ibandronate and placebo or between ibandronate and other bisphosphonates. However, a sensitivity analysis, which excluded studies at "high risk" of detection bias, found that the risk of serious adverse events was significantly lower for ibandronate than for the other bisphosphonates (risk ratio 0.79, 95% confidence interval 0.66-0.94, p < 0.01). This finding was assessed as high-quality evidence when the GRADE criteria were applied. Only five studies (26%) reported kidney injury as an adverse event. CONCLUSIONS: Limited evidence was found to suggest that ibandronate may carry a lower risk of serious adverse events compared with other bisphosphonates. Further high-quality randomized controlled trials are needed to compare the risk of kidney injury associated with the various bisphosphonates.
The nonvertebral efficacy of ibandronate is demonstrated by a pooled analysis of all relevant clinical trials. ORIGINAL ARTICLE: Cranney A, Wells GA, Yetisir E, et al. Ibandronate for the prevention of nonvertebral fractures: a pooled analysis of individual patient data. Osteoporos Int. 2009;20(2):291-297.
It is well accepted that tumor cells in the bone, especially from breast cancer, prostate cancer and multiple myeloma, can stimulate osteoclast formation and activity. Bisphosphonates are potent inhibitors of osteoclast-mediated normal and pathologic bone resorption. Besides their apoptotic and antiproliferative activity on osteoclasts, bisphosphonates can also exert similar effects on macrophages and tumor cells. Currently, it is unknown if this effect can be translated into clinical practice with regard to an effective adjuvant therapeutic regimen for high-risk patients with systemic recurrences following primary treatment of a given cancer. There are several new aspects that might extend the clinical use of ibandronate, a bisphosphate, in oncology: prevention of hypogonadal osteoporosis in men, palliative management of painful osseous metastases and adjuvant therapy of high-risk prostate cancer patients. Safety and tolerability are excellent for the oral and intravenous formulations, and ibandronate can even be safely applied in pre-existing renal insufficiency. The purpose of this review is to critically reflect the pharmacology and clinical efficacy of ibandronate in the management of tumor-induced hypercalcemia, osteoporosis and metastatic bone disease.
Bone metastases are the most common cause of pain in patients with advanced cancer, and are associated with progressive skeletal destruction, spinal problems, and hypercalcaemia. Radiotherapy, analgesia, and surgery are the accepted treatment options for chronic malignant bone pain, with a stepped approach being generally recommended. In the past decade, the bisphosphonates, which reduce bone turnover, increase bone mass, and decrease the risk of fracture, have become established as an effective treatment in patients with cancer metastasising to bone. The nitrogencontaining bisphosphonate, ibandronate, has been shown to reduce the risk of skeletal events after oral or intravenous administration in controlled clinical trials in various malignancies, and to confer significant palliation of bone pain and improvements in health-related quality of life in patients with metastatic breast cancer, in particular. Tolerability of this agent has been good, with very low frequencies of acute-phase reactions and osteonecrosis of the jaw, and no evidence of acute nephrotoxicity.
Bisphosphonates, with their proven efficacy and safety, are the most commonly prescribed treatment for women with postmenopausal osteoporosis; however, optimal efficacy is often not achieved due to poor patient adherence to medication. Poor adherence leads to an increased risk of fracture, which itself results in morbidity, elevated healthcare costs and potentially, mortality. Although weekly rather than daily dosing of bisphosphonates has improved adherence, there remains a significant problem, and dosing less frequently than weekly has been suggested as a possible means for further improving adherence. Ibandronate is a new bisphosphonate that has a specific structure and set of characteristics that enable less frequent dosing than currently available bisphosphonates. This review provides details of the general structural features of all bisphosphonates and how these are understood to contribute to their functions in osteoporosis treatment. From this, the unique structure of ibandronate is described, along with how this translates into the high antiresorptive potency, favorable bone-binding, persistence in bone, and good tolerability that permits less frequent dosing. Finally, the clinical evidence for ibandronate is briefly presented, demonstrating the viability of less frequent dosing, with its potential benefits for patient convenience and adherence to therapy.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy and safety of monthly oral 150 mg ibandronate in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMO). METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis were performed to determine treatment efficacy and safety outcomes between monthly oral 150 mg ibandronate and weekly 70 mg alendronate, daily 2.5 mg ibandronate, and a placebo. RESULTS: Eight randomized controlled trials were included in this systematic review and meta-analysis. Once-monthly 150 mg ibandronate therapy was clinically comparable to weekly 70 mg alendronate, showing increased bone mineral density (BMD) in both the lumbar spine and total hip. Pooled data from two cross-over trials showed that significantly more women with PMO preferred once-monthly ibandronate therapy to once-weekly alendronate therapy (relative risk [RR], 2.422; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2.111 to 2.825; p < 1 x 10(-8)) and found the monthly ibandronate regimen more convenient than the weekly alendronate regimen (RR, 3.096; 95% CI, 2.622 to 3.622; p < 1 x 10(-8)). Monthly 150 mg ibandronate therapy resulted in a significantly higher change in BMD of the lumbar spine than with the placebo. A once monthly 150 mg regimen produced greater increases in lumbar spine, total hip, femoral neck, and trochanter BMD than daily treatment, with a similar incidence of adverse events between the groups. CONCLUSIONS: Once monthly 150 mg ibandronate therapy was clinically comparable to weekly 70 mg alendronate, and patients strongly preferred the convenience of monthly ibandronate over weekly alendronate. Monthly 150 mg ibandronate was superior to, and as well tolerated as, the daily treatment.
AIM: To compare the effect of calcium and cholecalciferol alone and along with additional sodium fluoride or ibandronate on bone mineral density (BMD) and fractures in patients with Crohn's disease (CD). METHODS: Patients (n =148) with reduced BMD (T-score < -1) were randomized to receive cholecalciferol (1000 IU) and calcium citrate (800 mg) daily alone(group A, n = 32) or along with additional sodium fluoride (25 mg bid) (group B, n = 62) or additional ibandronate (1 mg iv/3-monthly) (group C, n = 54). Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry of the lumbar spine (L1-L4) and proximal right femur and X-rays of the spine were performed at baseline and after 1.0, 2.25 and 3.5 years. Fracture-assessment included visual reading of X-rays and quantitative morphometry of vertebral bodies (T4-L4). RESULTS: One hundred and twenty three (83.1%) patients completed the first year for intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis. Ninety two (62.2%) patients completed the second year and 71 (47.8%) the third year available for per-protocol (PP) analysis. With a significant increase in T-score of the lumbar spine by +0.28 +/- 0.35 [95% confidence interval (CI): 0.162-0.460, P < 0.01], +0.33 +/- 0.49 (95% CI: 0.109-0.558, P < 0.01), +0.43 +/- 0.47 (95% CI: 0.147-0.708, P < 0.01) in group A, +0.22 +/- 0.33 (95% CI: 0.125-0.321, P < 0.01); +0.47 +/- 0.60 (95% CI: 0.262-0.676, P < 0.01), +0.51 +/- 0.44 (95% CI: 0.338-0.682, P < 0.01) in group B and +0.22 +/- 0.38 (95% CI: 0.111-0.329, P < 0.01), +0.36 +/- 0.53 (95% CI: 0.147-0.578, P < 0.01), +0.41 +/- 0.48 (95% CI: 0.238-0.576, P < 0.01) in group C, respectively, during the 1.0, 2.25 and 3.5 year periods (PP analysis), no treatment regimen was superior in any in- or between-group analyses. In the ITT analysis, similar results in all in- and between-group analyses with a significant in-group but non-significant between-group increase in T-score of the lumbar spine by 0.38 +/- 0.46 (group A, P < 0.01), 0.37 +/- 0.50 (group B, P < 0.01) and 0.35 +/- 0.49 (group C, P < 0.01) was observed. Follow-up in ITT analysis was still 2.65 years. One vertebral fracture in the sodium fluoride group was detected. Study medication was safe and well tolerated. CONCLUSION: Additional sodium fluoride or ibandronate had no benefit over calcium and cholecalciferol alone in managing reduced BMD in CD.
This registry-based study of 3068 patients with osteoporosis compared the anti-fracture effectiveness of denosumab versus bisphosphonates. Denosumab was associated with significantly greater risk reduction than alendronate or ibandronate for vertebral and any fractures. No difference in fracture risk reduction was found between zoledronate and denosumab. PURPOSE: To analyse the fracture risk of patients with osteoporosis receiving bisphosphonates or denosumab in a real-world setting. METHODS: This registry-based cohort study evaluated patients taking denosumab, bisphosphonates or both sequentially. Fractures were analysed using rates, rate ratios and hazard ratios (HR), including both therapies as time-varying co-variates. Fracture risk hazards were adjusted (aHR) for baseline T-Scores and trabecular bone score (TBS) and were additionally analysed with inverse probability treatment weighting. RESULTS: A total of 3068 patients (89% female; median age at treatment onset, 69 years [63 to 76]) received denosumab (median duration 2.8 years, [2.2 to 4.7]), bisphosphonates (3.4 years, [2.1 to 5.7]) or both sequentially. Thus, 11,078 subject-years were assessed for bisphosphonates (41% alendronate, 36% ibandronate, 23% zoledronate) and 4216 for denosumab. Moreover, 48,375 subject-years were observed before treatment onset, in addition to 2593 years of drug holidays. A total of 1481 vertebral fractures (435 under therapy), 1508 non-vertebral fractures (499 under therapy) and 202 hip fractures (67 under therapy) occurred after age 50. The risks of vertebral, non-vertebral and hip fractures were significantly lower under all bisphosphonates, denosumab and drug holidays than before treatment onset (all p < 0.001). After adjusting for age, baseline T-scores and TBS, denosumab was associated with lower risk than alendronate or ibandronate for vertebral fractures (aHR 0.47 (0.35 to 0.64) and 0.70 [0.53 to 0.91], p < 0.001 and p = 0.009, respectively) and any fractures (aHR 0.62 [0.51 to 0.76] and 0.77 [0.64 to 0.92], p < 0.001 and p = 0.004). With propensity weighting, denosumab was associated with a lower hip fracture risk compared to alendronate (HR 0.54 [0.29 to 0.98], p = 0.044). No difference in fracture risk reduction (vertebral, non-vertebral or hip) was found between zoledronate and denosumab. CONCLUSIONS: When adjusting for disease severity, denosumab was associated with significantly greater risk reduction than alendronate and ibandronate for vertebral fractures. No difference in fracture risk reduction was found between zoledronate and denosumab.
Mixtures of ibandronate monosodium salt with eleven gluco- and/or galacto-pyranoside derivatives as counterions were designed to prepare co-crystals with improved intestinal absorption. In general, gastrointestinal absorption of bisphosphonates after oral administration is approximately 1%. Co-crystals were generated by means of thermodynamically and/or kinetically controlled crystallization processes. Seventy-seven prepared samples were analyzed by means of FT-NIR, FT-Raman spectrometry and solid state NMR spectroscopy. New entities of ibandronate monosodium salt with phenyl-beta-D-galactopyranoside were found and characterized. The absorption of these potential new co-crystals was investigated by means of PAMPA experiments. In the present study the relationships between the chemical structures of the studied compounds required for co-crystal generation are discussed.
OBJECTIVE: Osteoporosis and atherosclerosis are interconnected entities and share also some pathophysiological mechanisms. Moreover, recent literature data have supported the hypothesis that bisphosphonates (BPs) may have some antiatherogenic actions. This study aimed to evaluate the effects of one year with zoledronate or ibandronate given intravenously on lipid profile and on carotid artery intima-media thickness (CA-IMT). METHODS: Sixty postmenopausal osteoporotic women (mean age: 66.6+/-7.8years) were randomly assigned to 1-year treatment with zoledronate 5mg i.v. annually or ibandronate 3mg i.v. every 3 months. In all patients at baseline and after 12months we measured CA-IMT, total cholesterol (TC), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD), bone alkaline phosphatase (B-ALP), type I collagen beta carboxy telopeptide (betaCTX), osteocalcin (OC), fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23) and sclerostin. RESULTS: The osteoporotic women treated with zoledronate showed a greater reduction in CA-IMT than those treated with ibandronate. HDL-C and HDL-C/LDL-C ratio showed a significant (p<0.01) increase in the 2 groups, whereas, LDL-C showed a reduction in the two groups which, however, reached statistical significance (p<0.05) only in the zoledronate group. FGF-23 serum levels showed a similar and significant decrease in both the women treated with zoledronate and in those treated with ibandronate. At the end of the study period sclerostin serum levels showed a higher increase in the patients treated with zoledronate than in those treated with ibandronate. CONCLUSION: In osteoporotic women both zoledronate and ibandronate given intravenously resulted in an increase in HDL-C/LDL-C ratio and a reduction of CA-IMT which was significant only for zoledronate. Further prospective studies are needed to clarify whether the change in FGF-23 and sclerostin levels is a marker or a potential mechanism of the action of BPs at a vascular level.
