Herein, we review the recent progress in the synthesis of representative nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), ibuprofen and naproxen. Although these drugs were discovered over 50 years ago, novel practical and asymmetric approaches are still being developed for their synthesis. In addition, this endeavor has enabled access to more potent and selective derivatives from the key frameworks of ibuprofen and naproxen. The development of a synthetic route to ibuprofen and naproxen over the last 10 years is summarized, including developing methodologies, finding novel synthetic routes, and applying continuous-flow chemistry.
Ibuprofen was introduced in England in 1967 and in the United States in 1974 as an anti-inflammatory drug in humans. It has weak but definite anti-inflammatory properties similar to those of aspirin, milligram for milligram, but with considerably less adverse effect on the stomach. Ibuprofen is chemically related to fenoprofen and naproxen, but lack of effect for any one in this chemical class of propionic-acid derivatives does not necessarily mean lack of effect for any other in an individual patient. The drug has analgesic properties, probably related to its anti-inflammatory effect. It inhibits prostaglandin synthesis and has no effect on the adrenopituitary axis, making it a nonsteroidal agent. Ibuprofen has been shown to be effective in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis and is probably effective in ankylosing spondylitis, gout, and Bartter's syndrome.
This retrospective, study compared the efficacy and safety of Ibuprofen-Lysinate (Arfen, intramuscular formulation, Group I, n=156) used during 2000-2005 and Sodium-ibuprofen (Pedea, intravenous solution, Group II, n=60) used during 2006-2008, for the prophylaxis of Patent Ductus Arteriosus in inborn neonates with gestational age </= 28 weeks. Ductus closure rate after prophylaxis was significantly higher (73.1% vs 50%; P=0.002) and surgical ligation significantly lower (8.2% vs 23.3%; P=0.005) in Group I. A smaller number of neonates of Group I vs Group II showed oliguria and hemorrhagic disease.
The anti-inflammatory drug ibuprofen is considered to be an emerging contaminant because of its presence in different environments (from water bodies to soils) at concentrations with adverse effects on aquatic organisms due to cytotoxic and genotoxic damage, high oxidative cell stress, and detrimental effects on growth, reproduction, and behavior. Because of its high human consumption rate and low environmental degradation rate, ibuprofen represents an emerging environmental problem. Ibuprofen enters the environment from different sources and accumulates in natural environmental matrices. The problem of drugs, particularly ibuprofen, as contaminants is complicated because few strategies consider them or apply successful technologies to remove them in a controlled and efficient manner. In several countries, ibuprofen's entry into the environment is an unattended contamination problem. It is a concern for our environmental health system that requires more attention. Due to its physicochemical characteristics, ibuprofen degradation is difficult in the environment or by microorganisms. There are experimental studies that are currently focused on the problem of drugs as potential environmental contaminants. However, these studies are insufficient to address this ecological issue worldwide. This review focuses on deepening and updating the information concerning ibuprofen as a potential emerging environmental contaminant and the potential for using bacteria for its biodegradation as an alternative technology.
Equilibrium solubility, the profile and the rate of ibuprofen dissolution in solutions of sodium dodecyl sulfate, Tween 60 and Brij 35 were studied. It was found that the solubility of ibuprofen was enhanced by the formed micellar system. The size and shape of formed micelles depended on the used particular surfactant. The mechanism of ibuprofen dissolution in micellar system was discussed.
Flurbiprofen and ibuprofen, two propionic acid derivatives with anti-inflammatory and analgesic activity, were compared in a double-blind multiclinic study in 195 patients with osteoarthritis of the peripheral joints. The patients were given 80 mg/day flurbiprofen or 1600 mg/day ibuprofen for six weeks. Pain, subjective evaluation and functional tests improved significantly in both groups. There were no statistically significant differences between the two treatments in any of the responses. Gastro-intestinal side-effects, generally mild, developed in 5-6% of the patients.
Ibuprofen is a non-steroidal analgesic and anti-inflammatory drug widely used in current medical practice. After a thorough search of the literature I found no well-documented case of severe thrombocytopenia following its therapeutic use. Described below is a case of life-threatening thrombocytopenia induced by ibuprofen.
Solid dispersions of ibuprofen (IBF) were prepared by solvent evaporation method using polyethylene glycol 10000 (PEG), talc, and PEG-talc as dispersion carriers. The drug-carrier(s) interactions in the solid state were investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and x-ray diffraction analysis. Interactions in the solution were studied by performing dissolution experiments. No important and well-defined chemical interaction was found between the ingredients. The increase in the IBF dissolution rate from the solid dispersions with the carriers used in this study could be attributed to several factors such as improved wettability, local solubilization, and drug particle size reduction.
Several organometallic complexes based on more than twenty different metals have already been approved for medical applications. The aim of the presented research was to obtain complexes of silver and copper with the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ibuprofen and xanthine alkaloid caffeine and evaluate selected aspects of their bioactivity and biosafety in terms of their future possible applications. The obtained complexes were characterized by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, thermogravimetry, UV-VIS spectroscopy, conductometry, elemental analysis, and bioassays. Cytotoxicity for normal human cells of the CCD-Co18 cell line was evaluated by determining the IC(50) value, with metabolic and morphology assessments. It was observed that complexes containing ibuprofen and caffeine exhibited lower toxicity than those with ibuprofen only. Complexes with copper showed lower toxicity towards healthy human fibroblasts compared to silver-based compounds, with an IC(50) above 140 mug mL(-1). However, in the silver complexes, the presence of caffeine increased the potency of COX-2 inhibition. Antimicrobial effects against different Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial strains were evaluated by MIC determination with values less than 20 mug mL(-1).
Fever has been recognized as a sign of disease for centuries. Health care professionals and parents frequently search for new methods of pediatric fever control. Current research suggests that prostaglandins play an important role in fever production. As antipyretics, both acetaminophen and ibuprofen are effective in fever reduction by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis. In this article, the pathophysiology of fever is discussed as a foundation for understanding fever management. The metabolic pathways of both agents are compared as they relate to fever control; the common side effects and nursing management for acute overdoses are discussed.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the antipyretic effects and safety of ibuprofen compared with acetaminophen in febrile children. DATA SOURCES: Searches of MEDLINE (1966-November 2003) and EMBASE (1988-November 2003) were conducted using the terms ibuprofen and acetaminophen. Bibliographies of selected articles were reviewed. DATA SYNTHESIS: Ibuprofen was significantly more effective than acetaminophen in reducing fever after a single dose. Ibuprofen was found to be more effective after 6 hours, but not after a longer period of time. Studies with multiple doses have also failed to show that one drug is better than the other. CONCLUSIONS: The efficacy and effectiveness of acetaminophen and ibuprofen in their recommended dosages are similar, with slightly more beneficial effects shown with ibuprofen.
NSAIDs are commonly avoided by patients with aspirin-induced asthma based on the premise that there is a significant cross-reactivity between aspirin and other NSAIDs. However, ibuprofen, a NSAID sold over the counter in most countries, is commonly given to children for relief of fever and mild-to-moderate pain. Consequently, increased risk of acute bronchospasm induced by ibuprofen in children with asthma remains a persistent concern. More recently, the assumption that children with asthma are at a greater risk for exacerbations of their disease if they take ibuprofen has been questioned. There is little evidence to measurably increases morbidity in the great majority of children with asthma. In addition, recent evidence suggest that ibuprofen measurably increases morbidity in the great majority of [corrected] children with asthma. Given the infrequent occurrence of aspirin/NSAID sensitivity in children with asthma, it seems reasonable to allow the use of ibuprofen in this population unless there is a personal or family history of aspirin-induced asthma. In addition, the inflammatory pathogenesis of asthma, anti-inflammatory effect of ibuprofen, and evidence suggesting ibuprofen may reduce morbidity in children with asthma raises the intriguing possibility that ibuprofen might actually have therapeutic benefit for at least some children with asthma.
In recent years there has been a growing interest in formulating solid dispersions, which purposes mainly include solubility enhancement, sustained drug release and taste masking. The most notable problem by these dispersions is drug-carrier (in)solubility. Here we focus on solubility parameters as a tool for predicting the solubility of a drug in certain carriers. Solubility parameters were determined in two different ways: solely by using calculation methods, and by experimental approaches. Six different calculation methods were applied in order to calculate the solubility parameters of the drug ibuprofen and several excipients. However, we were not able to do so in the case of ibuprofen lysinate, as calculation models for salts are still not defined. Therefore, the extended Hansen's approach and inverse gas chromatography (IGC) were used for evaluating of solubility parameters for ibuprofen lysinate. The obtained values of the total solubility parameter did not differ much between the two methods: by the extended Hansen's approach it was deltat = 31.15 MPa(0.5) and with IGC it was deltat = 35.17 MPa(0.5). However, the values of partial solubility parameters, i.e., deltad, deltap and deltah, did differ from each other, what might be due to the complex behaviour of a salt in the presence of various solvents.
PURPOSE: Ibuprofen liquigel has been believed to provide faster analgesic effect. However, comparative studies evaluating the efficacy of liquigel versus regular tablets are not available. Hence, we carried out a systematic review and a meta-analysis to compare the onset of action and efficacy of over-the-counter doses of ibuprofen liquigel (IBULG) vs ibuprofen tablets (IBUT).  Methods. Published clinical trials of IBULG and IBUT were identified through a systematic search of various data bases up to October, 2015. RESULTS: In total 18 eligible studies on IBUT and 4 on IBULG were found.  There was no significant difference in the median time to the first perceptible pain relief or the proportion of patients with more than 50% pain relief between the two products. However, IBULG yielded significantly greater odd ratios in meaningful pain relief at 60, 90 and 120 min, but not at 30 min, as compared with IBUT.  Conclusion. The available evidence, although not overwhelming, suggest a faster onset of analgesia for liquigel as compared with tablets. This article is open to POST-PUBLICATION REVIEW. Registered readers (see "For Readers") may comment by clicking on ABSTRACT on the issue's contents page.
The NSAID ibuprofen (2-(4-isobutylphenyl)propanoic acid) and the structurally related 3-phenylpropanoic acid (3PPA), are widely used pharmaceutical and personal care products (PPCPs) which enter municipal waste streams but whose relatively low rates of elimination by wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) are leading to the contamination of aquatic resources. Here, we report the isolation of three bacterial strains from a municipal WWTP, which as a consortium are capable of mineralizing ibuprofen. These were identified as the Pseudomonas citronellolis species, termed RW422, RW423 and RW424, in which the first two of these isolates were shown to contain the catabolic ipf operon responsible for the first steps of ibuprofen mineralization. These ipf genes which are associated with plasmids could, experimentally, only be transferred between other Sphingomonadaceae species, such as from the ibuprofen degrading Sphingopyxis granuli RW412 to the dioxins degrading Rhizorhabdus wittichii RW1, generating RW421, whilst a transfer from the P. citronellolis isolates to R. wittichii RW1 was not observed. RW412 and its derivative, RW421, as well as the two-species consortium RW422/RW424, can also mineralize 3PPA. We show that IpfF can convert 3PPA to 3PPA-CoA; however, the growth of RW412 with 3PPA produces a major intermediate that was identified by NMR to be cinnamic acid. This and the identification of other minor products from 3PPA allows us to propose the major pathway used by RW412 to mineralize 3PPA. Altogether, the findings in this study highlight the importance of ipf genes, horizontal gene transfer, and alternative catabolic pathways in the bacterial populations of WWTPs to eliminate ibuprofen and 3PPA.
One of the approaches adopted, as the first treatment method, in previous pandemic viruses before the production of new vaccines or drugs, is to evaluate the effectiveness of existing drugs. Sometimes, it is known that the combination of drugs provides better treatment by increasing the activity of the drugs due to mutual interactions. In this work, we used quantum theory of atoms in molecules and density functional theory to examine the structure and activity relationship between Favipiravir (FPV), a potential antiviral drug for ribonucleic acid viruses, and an inhibitor of influenza virus, and Ibuprofen (IBP), a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. The drug-likeness evaluations of IBP...FPV were also performed. It was observed that FPV and IBP interact in several ways via hydrogen bonding (HB) leading to changes in the activities of the combined drug and IBP...FPV is predicted to be orally bioavailable. It was also found that the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) is located on IBP and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) is distributed over FPV. The biological activity of the combined drug system is increased because of the small HOMO-LUMO energy gap value, partially covalent and non-covalent HB interactions.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.
