Imatinib mesylate is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor used in the treatment of a variety of oncological conditions. It has been associated with a spectrum of pigmentary cutaneous side effects. Despite the well-known association of eruptive melanocytic nevi with the use of other tyrosine kinase inhibitors, this phenomenon has not been linked to the administration of imatinib. We present the first case of imatinib-induced eruptive nevi in an 18-year-old patient with acute lymphocytic leukaemia in remission.
A series of new urea/thiourea derivatives 3a-j were synthesized by simple addition reaction of functionalized phenyl isocyanates/isothiocyanates 2a-j with N-(5-amino-2-methylphenyl)-4-(3-pyridyl)-2-pyrimidinamine (imatinib intermediate) (1) in the presence of 1,4-dimethyl piperazine (DMPZ) as a base, and another series of new sulfonamide/carbamate derivatives 5a-k were synthesized by reacting 1 with various substituted aromatic sulfonyl chlorides 4a-f and aromatic/aliphatic chloroformates 4g-k in the presence of DMPZ as a base. The title compounds 3a-j and 5a-k were characterized by IR, (1)H, (13)C NMR and mass spectral data. Antimicrobial, antioxidant and in silico molecular docking studies were made against aromatase.
Philadelphia chromosome positive (Ph+) B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is extremely rare in pregnancy. Although the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has significantly improved outcomes of patients with Ph+ ALL, its use during pregnancy is not recommended due to the risk of fetal malformations. There are limited data on the use of TKIs during pregnancy and its long-term effects on the fetus. Within this context, we present a case of a 25-year-old woman diagnosed with Ph+ ALL during the third trimester and the safe and effective use of imatinib as treatment after failure of conventional chemotherapy.
June 2018 was the 20th anniversary of the clinical use of the first tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), imatinib, for chronic myeloid leukemia. Since then, the change in prognosis for patients with this disease is one of the major success stories of modern cancer medicine. The dilemmas that face physicians and patients are no longer only those concerned with delaying inevitable progression to the terminal blastic phase or selecting the individuals most likely to benefit from allogeneic stem-cell transplantation; rather, they are now focused also on the choice of TKI, the management of comorbidities and adverse effects, strategies to improve quality of life, and the appropriateness of a trial of therapy discontinuation. Interestingly, with 4 TKIs approved for frontline use, the choice of initial therapy continues to cause controversy, a situation made more complicated by the tantalizing prospect of treatment-free remission. In this manuscript, we will explore the factors influencing this decision and try to provide a pragmatic and clinically applicable solution.
OBJECTIVES: To synthetize the available evidence concerning efficacy and safety of imatinib mesylate, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in systemic sclerosis (SSc). METHODS: A systematic search following the PRISMA-statement in PubMed/MEDLINE, Cochrane CENTRAL, and Web of Science databases up to 7 February 2020 was conducted. Considering the substantial heterogeneity expected, a random-effects model to pool data from selected studies was adopted. RESULTS: After a treatment period ranging from 6 to 12 months, the pooled analysis revealed that imatinib mesylate significantly improved modified Rodnan skin score (mRSS) (mean difference [MD] = -3.091, 95%CI -6.081 to -0.102, p = 0.043), whereas health-related assessment questionnaire (HAQ) remains unchanged (-0.096; 95 CI -0.197 to -0.006). Data regarding change in pulmonary function tests were insufficiently consistent to be considered eligible for meta-analysis. Finally, regarding safety, the authors found a pooled dropout rate due to all adverse events of 22% and a rate of serious adverse events of 17%. CONCLUSION: The significant change within the range of clinical relevance of mRSS suggests the possible use of imatinib mesylate in SSc, whereas it is still not possible to draw firm conclusions regarding the efficacy of the drug on lung involvement. Specifically designed and powered studies are needed to investigate imatinib mesylate therapy in SSc.
INTRODUCTION: In the randomized double-blind placebo-controlled CounterCOVID study, oral imatinib treatment conferred a positive clinical outcome and a signal for reduced mortality in COVID-19 patients. High concentrations of alpha-1 acid glycoprotein (AAG) were observed in these patients and were associated with increased total imatinib concentrations. AIMS: This post-hoc study aimed to compare the difference in exposure following oral imatinib administration in COVID-19 patients to cancer patients and assess assocations between pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters and pharmacodynamic (PD) outcomes of imatinib in COVID-19 patients. We hypothesize that a relatively higher drug exposure of imatinib in severe COVID-19 patients leads to improved pharmacodynamic outcome parameters. METHODS: 648 total concentration plasma samples obtained from 168 COVID-19 patients were compared to 475 samples of 105 cancer patients, using an AAG-binding model. Total trough concentration at steady state (Ct(trough)) and total average area under the concentration-time curve (AUCt(ave)) were associated with ratio between partial oxygen pressure and fraction of inspired oxygen (P/F), WHO ordinal scale (WHO-score) and liberation of oxygen supplementation (O(2)lib). Linear regression, linear mixed effects models and time-to-event analysis were adjusted for possible confounders. RESULTS: AUCt(ave) and Ct(trough) were respectively 2.21-fold (95%CI 2.07-2.37) and 1.53-fold (95%CI 1.44-1.63) lower for cancer compared to COVID-19 patients. Ct(trough), not AUCt(ave), associated significantly with P/F (beta=-19,64; p-value=0.014) and O(2)lib (HR 0.78; p-value= 0.032), after adjusting for sex, age, neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio, dexamethasone concomitant treatment, AAG and baseline P/F-and WHO-score. Ct(trough), but not AUCt(ave) associated significantly with WHO-score. These results suggest an inverse relationship between PK-parameters, Ct(trough) and AUCt(ave), and PD outcomes. CONCLUSION: COVID-19 patients exhibit higher total imatinib exposure compared to cancer patients, attributed to differences in plasma protein concentrations. Higher imatinib exposure in COVID-19 patients did not associate with improved clinical outcomes. Ct(trough) and AUCt(ave) inversely associated with some PD-outcomes, which may be biased by disease course, variability in metabolic rate and protein binding. Therefore, additional PKPD analyses into unbound imatinib and its main metabolite may better explain exposure-response.
Tweetable abstract Present evidence supports the use of intensified pharmacologic monitoring of #imatinib including #TherapeuticDrugMonitoring and #PGx to improve outcomes in patients with GI stromal tumor. Future studies need to address emerging questions to facilitate implementation in clinics.
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a clonal hematologic malignancy of the myeloid lineage caused by the oncogenic BCR/ABL fusion protein that promotes CML cell proliferation and protects them against drug-induced apoptosis. In this study, we determine LATS1 and LATS2 expression in CML cells derived from patients who are resistant to imatinib (IM) treatment. Significant upregulation of LATS1 and LATS2 was found in these CML patients compared to healthy donors. To further explore whether the expression of LATS1/2 contributes to the IM-resistant phenotype, IM-resistant CML cell lines generated by culturing CML-derived erythroblastic K562 cells in increasing concentrations of IM were used as in vitro models. Up-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 was observed in IM-resistant K562 cells. Reduction of LATS using either Lats-IN-1 (TRULI), a specific LATS inhibitor, or shRNA targeting LATS1/2 significantly reduced clonogenicity, increased apoptosis and induced differentiation of K562 cells to late-stage erythroid cells. Furthermore, depletion of LATS1 and LATS2 also increased the sensitivity of K562 cells to IM. Taken together, our results suggest that LATS could be one of the key factors contributing to the rapid proliferation, reduced apoptosis, and IM resistance of CML cells. Targeting LATS could be a promising treatment to enhance the therapeutic effect of a conventional BCR/ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor such as IM.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), the most common sarcoma, is mainly caused by an oncogenic mutation in the KIT receptor tyrosine kinase. Targeting KIT using tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as imatinib and sunitinib, provides substantial benefit; however, in most patients, the disease will eventually progress due to KIT secondary mutations leading to treatment failure. Understanding how GIST cells initially adapt to KIT inhibition should guide the selection of appropriate therapies to overcome the emergence of resistance. Several mechanisms have been broadly implicated in the resistance to imatinib anti-tumoral effects, including the reactivation of MAPK signaling upon KIT/PDGFRA targeted inhibition. This study provides evidence that LImb eXpression 1 (LIX1), a protein we identified as a regulator of the Hippo transducers YAP1 and TAZ, is upregulated upon imatinib or sunitinib treatment. LIX1 silencing in GIST-T1 cells impaired imatinib-induced MAPK signaling reactivation and enhanced imatinib anti-tumor effect. Our findings identified LIX1 as a key regulator of the early adaptative response of GIST cells to targeted therapies.
Imatinib is an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) and first-line therapy for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). There is a positive correlation between serum imatinib concentrations and treatment response. However, the specific relationship between the blood concentration of imatinib and its influencing factors remains unclear. This study collected basic information from 102 patients using imatinib as first-line treatment for CML. Further, we analyzed the individual differences in imatinib concentration and explored its influencing factors. Through intra-day and inter-day precision studies, we found that the precision for the imatinib assay methodology was within +/-13% and that the recovery rate was above 85%. There is notable individual variation in the blood concentration of imatinib; the recommended treatment concentration is 860-1500 ng/mL, with only 41.40% of patients achieving this concentration. Also, there was a negative correlation between age and imatinib trough concentration (C(trough) ), as is observed between age and N-desmethyl imatinib. Moreover, compared with the adolescent group, the serum imatinib C(trough) for groups aged 17-47 and 48-68 years was significantly reduced. Further analysis shows that imatinib C(trough) values reaching therapeutic concentrations (59%) increased dramatically for patients with CML aged 17-47 years. Moreover, groups dosed with 400 mg/day resulted in therapeutic imatinib concentrations for 68% of patients with CML, which was the best performance. The established method was validated, with acceptable accuracy, precision, linearity, and stability, as required, and then successfully applied to the therapeutic drug monitoring of imatinib. Age, dose, and metabolites can influence the imatinib concentration and its therapeutic effect in patients with CML.
Cutaneous reactions to imatinib are common and occur in 9.5% to 69% of patients depending on the series reported. Maculopapular eruptions, erythematous eruptions, edema, and periorbital edema are the most common adverse events observed. Imatinib can also induce severe skin eruptions and generalized skin eruptions. Toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens Johnson syndrome has been linked to the use of imatinib. Imatinib has caused acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis. Purpuric vasculitis and mycosis fungoides-like reactions has occurred after imatinib use. Rarer side effects include: hypopigmentation, lichenoid reactions, pityriasiform eruptions, pityriasis rosea, psoriasis, reactivation or induction of porphyria cutanea tarda, neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis, Sweet's syndrome, erythema nodosum, EBV-positive cutaneous B-cell lymphoproliferative disease, possible induction of squamous cell, hyaline cell syringomas, follicular mucinosis, pseudolymphoma-type drug eruptions, and malpighian epitheliomas. Most cutaneous eruptions caused by imatinib do not necessitate discontinuance of imatinib and are usually self limited, despite continued treatment. Administration of oral or topical corticosteroids can ameliorate some of imatinib's cutaneous side effects.
Co-delivery of chemotherapeutic agents using nanocarriers is a promising strategy for enhancing therapeutic efficacy of anticancer agents. The aim of this work was to develop tamoxifen and imatinib dual drug loaded temperature-sensitive liposomes to treat breast cancer. Liposomes were prepared using 1, 2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPPC), monopalmitoyl-2-hydroxy-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (MPPC), and different surface active agents. The liposomes were characterized for the average particle size, zeta potential, transition temperature, and drug release below and above liposomal transition temperature. The temperature-sensitive liposomes co-encapsulated with tamoxifen and imatinib were investigated for their synergistic activity against MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. The liposomal nanoparticles showed a transition temperature of 39.4  degrees C and >70% encapsulation efficiency for tamoxifen and imatinib. The temperature-responsive liposomes showed more than 80% drug released within 30 min above transition temperature. Dual drug loaded liposomes showed synergistic growth inhibition against MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Co-delivery of tamoxifen and imatinib using temperature-sensitive liposomes can be developed as a potential targeting strategy against breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Imatinib treatment for certain cancers can lead to elevated creatine kinase (CK) levels, potentially indicating muscle injury, and ongoing research aims to understand the correlation between imatinib levels and creatine kinase to assess its impact on treatment response. METHODS: This single-center observational study involved 76 chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients receiving imatinib treatment, focusing on evaluating drug and metabolite levels using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) instrumentation. Serum CK and creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) levels were assessed using Colorimetric kits. RESULTS: CK and CK-MB levels were measured, CK showed a median value of 211.5 IU/l and CK-MB showed a median value of 4.4 IU/l. Comparing low and high CK groups, significant differences were found in peak and trough plasma concentrations of imatinib and its metabolites. Correlations between CK levels and pharmacokinetic parameters were explored, with notable associations identified. Binary logistic regression revealed predictors influencing the therapeutic response to imatinib and categorized expected CK levels into high or low, with peak levels of imatinib emerging as a significant predictor for CK level categorization. CONCLUSION: The study highlights the link between imatinib's pharmacokinetics and elevated CK levels, indicating a possible correlation between specific metabolites and improved treatment response. Individualized monitoring of CK levels and imatinib pharmacokinetics could enhance care for CML patients.
Exon 11 KIT mutations are found in a majority of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) and are usually predictive of response to imatinib, a KIT, PDGFRA and ABL inhibitor. Exon 11 mutations with poor sensitivity to imatinib and poor outcome can be observed on rare occasions, including p.(L576P). In silico and in vitro studies suggested a decreased binding affinity for imatinib in p.(L576P) KIT mutations, thereby offering an explanation for their poor outcome and poor response to standard therapy. These observations were further corroborated with anecdotal case reports of refractoriness or non-durable response to imatinib therapy. However, we describe the favorable response to imatinib and outcome in 5 p.(L576P)-KIT mutant GIST patients treated at a tertiary sarcoma referral center. The sensitivity of p.(L576P)-KIT mutations to imatinib, and the prognostic impact of this mutation need to be further evaluated in a larger cohort. Based on our observations, p.(L576P) mutated GISTs should be treated with standard first line imatinib therapy.
BACKGROUND: Personalized dosing based on measurement of individual drug levels and adjusting the dose accordingly can improve efficacy and decrease unnecessary toxicity of oncological treatment. For imatinib, sunitinib, and pazopanib, this therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM)-guided dosing is, however, not routinely used, despite accumulating evidence favoring individualized dosing. Therefore, we aimed to identify and quantify (potential) barriers and facilitators in TDM-guided dosing for imatinib, sunitinib, and pazopanib. METHODS: We performed a mixed methods study among all stakeholders involved: patients, healthcare professionals (HCPs), pharmaceutical companies, and health insurance companies. During the first qualitative part of this study, we performed semi-structured individual interviews and one focus group interview to identify all (potential) barriers and facilitators, and during the second quantitative part of this study, we used a web-based survey to quantify these findings. The interviews addressed the six domains of the implementation of change model of Grol and Wensing: (1) the innovation itself; (2) the HCP; (3) the patient; (4) social context; (5) organizational context; and (6) finances, law, and governance. RESULTS: In the qualitative study, we interviewed 20 patients, 18 HCPs and 10 representatives of pharmaceutical and health insurance companies and identified 72 barriers and 90 facilitators. In the quantitative study, the survey was responded by 66 HCPs and 58 patients. Important barriers were on the domain of the HCP, such as a lack of experience with TDM (36.4%), on the domain of the patient, such as lack of awareness of TDM (39.7%), and the processing time for measurement and interpretation of the TDM result (40.9%) (organizational domain). Important facilitators were education of HCPs (95.5%), education of patients (87.9%) and facilitating an overview of when and where TDM measurements are being performed (86.4%). CONCLUSION: We identified and quantified important barriers and facilitators for the implementation of TDM-guided dosing for imatinib, sunitinib, and pazopanib. Based on our results, the implementation strategy should mainly focus on educating both HCPs and patients and on the organizational aspect of TDM.
Early molecular response at 3 months is predictive of improved overall survival and progression-free survival in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in the chronic phase. Although about one-third of patients treated with first-line imatinib do not achieve an early molecular response, long-term overall survival and progression-free survival are still observed in most patients. DASCERN (NCT01593254) is a prospective, phase IIb, randomized trial evaluating a switch to dasatinib in patients who have not achieved an early molecular response after 3 months of treatment with first-line imatinib. Early analysis demonstrated an improved major molecular response (MMR) rate at 12 months with dasatinib versus imatinib (29% vs. 13%, P=0.005). Here, we report results from the final 5-year follow-up. In total, 174 patients were randomized to dasatinib and 86 to remain on imatinib. Forty-six (53%) patients who remained on imatinib but subsequently experienced failure were allowed to cross over to dasatinib per protocol. At a minimum follow-up of 60 months, the cumulative MMR rate was significantly higher in patients randomized to dasatinib than those randomized to imatinib (77% vs. 44%, P<0.001). The median time to MMR was 13.9 months with dasatinib versus 19.7 months with imatinib. The safety profile was consistent with previous reports. These results demonstrate that switching to dasatinib after a suboptimal response to imatinib at 3 months leads to faster MMR, provides earlier deep molecular responses, and improves some outcomes in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in the chronic phase.
