The term thiazide is universally understood to refer to diuretics that exert their principal action in the distal tubule. The thiazide class is heterogenous and can be further subdivided into compounds containing the benzothiadiazine ring structure-the thiazide-type (e.g., hydrochlorothiazide)-and those lacking the benzothiadiazine ring-the thiazide-like (e.g., chlorthalidone and indapamide) drugs. Thiazide-like agents are longer acting and constitute the diuretics used in most of the cardiovascular outcome trials that established benefits of treatment with diuretics, but pragmatic aspects, such as lack of availability in convenient formulations, limit their use. Regardless of class heterogeneity, thiazides have retained importance in the management of hypertension for over 60 years. They are reliably effective as monotherapy in a majority of hypertensive patients, and augment the efficacy of other classes of antihypertensives when used in combination. Importantly, a thiazide-based treatment regimen lowers cardiovascular events, and their sturdy effect reinforces their place among the recommended first-line agents to treat hypertension in major domestic and international hypertension guidelines. There are few head-to-head comparisons within the class, but potential differences have been explored indirectly as well as in non-blood pressure mechanisms and potential pleiotropic properties. Until proven otherwise, the importance of these differences remains speculative, and clinicians should assume that cardiovascular events will be lowered similarly across agents when equivalent blood pressure reduction occurs. Thiazides remain underutilized, with only about one-third of hypertensive patients receiving them. For many patients, however, a thiazide is an indispensable component of their regimen to achieve adequate blood pressure control.
Hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) has often been contrasted with chlorthalidone, but relatively little is known about HCTZ versus indapamide (INDAP). This systematic review retrieved 9765 publications, and from these, it identified 14 randomized trials with 883 patients comparing HCTZ with INDAP and chlorthalidone on antihypertensive potency or metabolic effects. To make fair comparisons, the dose of the diuretic in each arm was assigned 1 of 3 dose levels. In random effects meta-analysis, INDAP and chlorthalidone lowered systolic blood pressure more than HCTZ: -5.1 mm Hg (95% confidence interval, -8.7 to -1.6); P=0.004 and -3.6 mm Hg (95% confidence interval, -7.3 to 0.0); P=0.052, respectively. For both comparisons, there was minimal heterogeneity in effect across trials and no evidence for publication bias. The HCTZ-INDAP contrast was biased in favor of greater HCTZ potency because of a much greater contribution to the overall effect from trials in which the HCTZ arm had a higher dose level than the INDAP arm. For the HCTZ-INDAP comparison, no single trial was responsible for the overall result nor was it possible to detect significant modifications of this comparison by duration of follow-up, high- versus low-bias trials, or the presence or absence of background medications. There were no detectable differences between HCTZ and INDAP in metabolic adverse effects, including effects on serum potassium. In conclusion, these head-to-head comparisons demonstrate that, like chlorthalidone, INDAP is more potent than HCTZ at commonly prescribed doses without evidence for greater adverse metabolic effects.
Hypertensive patients are frequently affected by erectile dysfunction (20-25%). This is often a manifestation of atherosclerosis, a systemic disease that itself requires management. Dietary measures and physical activity are beneficial for these patients. Regarding pharmacological options, these include modifying the antihypertensive treatment or using a phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor (PDE5 inhibitor) in males. The preferred antihypertensive treatments are angiotensin 2 receptor antagonists, ACE inhibitors, calcium channel blockers, and if necessary, a vasodilating beta-blocker (nebivolol). Thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics (with the exception of indapamide), traditional beta-blockers, and central antihypertensive agents should be avoided.
A variety of drugs have been implicated to induce or trigger pemphigus. A case of pemphigus foliaceus that was probably caused by indapamide, in whom the diagnosis was based on clinical, histologic and direct immunofluorescence testing, is reported here. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the first reported patient with indapamide-induced pemphigus.
A 58-year-old asymptomatic man was referred by his general practitioner for abnormal blood results. Routine blood tests to monitor blood count and kidney functions showed neutropenia and hyponatremia. He was euvolemic on examination. A further detailed investigation did not reveal any cause of neutropenia and hyponatremia. After careful assessment of their drug history, it transpired he recently started Indapamide for uncontrolled hypertension. Hyponatraemia is a common side effect of Indapamide and in addition, it can rarely cause agranulocytosis and leukopenia. Indapamide was stopped and the blood counts started to improve and became normal after two weeks.
