Two children with congenital nephrotic syndrome are described (one with Finnish-type nephrosis, the other with diffuse mesangial sclerosis). Both children have had a prolonged and sustained clinical response with good physical health and normal growth patterns using captopril and indometacin as their sole treatment. No adverse effects have been noted. We recommend a trial of indometacin and captopril treatment in cases of congenital nephrotic syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Rectal indometacin decreases the occurrence of pancreatitis after endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). However, the population most at risk and the optimal timing of administration require further investigation. We aimed to assess whether pre-procedural administration of rectal indometacin in all patients is more effective than post-procedural use in only high-risk patients to prevent post-ERCP pancreatitis. METHODS: We did a multicentre, single-blinded, randomised controlled trial at six centres in China. Eligible patients with native papilla undergoing ERCP were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio (with a computer-generated list) to universal pre-procedural indometacin or post-procedural indometacin in only high-risk patients, with stratification by trial centres and block size of ten. In the universal indometacin group, all patients received a single dose (100 mg) of rectal indometacin within 30 min before ERCP. In the risk-stratified, post-procedural indometacin group, only patients at predicted high risk received rectal indometacin, immediately after ERCP. Investigators, but not patients, were masked to group allocation. The primary outcome was overall ocurrence of post-ERCP pancreatitis. The analysis followed the intention-to-treat principle. This study was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02002650. FINDINGS: Between Dec 15, 2013, and Sept 21, 2015, 2600 patients were randomly assigned to universal, pre-procedural indometacin (n=1297) or risk-stratified, post-procedural indometacin (n=1303). Overall, post-ERCP pancreatitis occurred in 47 (4%) of 1297 patients assigned to universal indometacin and 100 (8%) of 1303 patients assigned to risk-stratified indometacin (relative risk 0.47; 95% CI 0.34-0.66; p<0.0001). Post-ERCP pancreatitis occurred in 18 (6%) of 305 high-risk patients in the universal group and 35 (12%) of 281 high-risk patients in the risk-stratified group (p=0.0057). Post-ERCP pancreatitis was also less frequent in average-risk patients in the universal group (3% [29/992]), in which they received indometacin, than in the risk-stratified group (6% [65/1022]), in which they did not receive the drug (p=0.0003). Other than pancreatitis, adverse events occurred in 41 (3%; two severe) patients in the universal indometacin group and 48 (4%; one severe) patients in the risk-stratified group. The most common adverse events were biliary infection (22 [2%] patients vs 33 [3%] patients) and gastrointestinal bleeding (13 [1%] vs ten [1%]). INTERPRETATION: Compared with a risk-stratified, post-procedural strategy, pre-procedural administration of rectal indometacin in unselected patients reduced the overall occurrence of post-ERCP pancreatitis without increasing risk of bleeding. Our results favour the routine use of rectal indometacin in patients without contraindications before ERCP. FUNDING: National Key Technology R&D Program, National Natural Science Foundation of China.
Modelling of the binding of two non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, indometacin (CAS 53-86-1) and diclofenac sodium (CAS 15307-79-6) to the molecule of human serum albumin is presented. The models are based on the data obtained using difference spectroscopic technique. Speculations were made concerning the structural properties of the drugs and albumin molecules as well as the type of chemical interactions taking part in the drug-albumin binding. The proposed approach represents a more detailed investigation on the mechanism of drug-protein interactions.
Amorphous materials are prevalent in the pharmaceutical setting. Whether they are a help or hindrance, their physico-chemical characteristics must be investigated. However, the amorphous form remains a challenge to characterise with many of its properties poorly understood. In this study, gamma-crystalline and amorphous indometacin are investigated using vibrational spectroscopy and quantum chemical calculations. The structure of the single indometacin molecule and the dimer in the gamma-form were optimised using density functional theory calculations. The optimised structures were similar to the conformations in the crystal form, suggesting that conformation of the molecules in the crystal may be close to the average molecular structure in less-ordered states. Infrared and Raman spectra were calculated from the optimised structures. Many modes in the calculated spectra could be matched with the experimental spectra of the gamma-crystalline and amorphous forms, and a description of the matched modes has been provided. By analysis of the theoretical vibrational modes it was confirmed that the amorphous form of indometacin produced by quench cooling the melt consists predominantly of dimers, similar in structure to in the gamma-crystalline form. In addition, differences in intermolecular bonding between the two forms were identified. Quantum mechanical calculations allow improved understanding of amorphous materials and their vibrational spectra.
During the last decade the number of investigations on the preparation and application of more effective drug release systems on the basis of nanocarriers from biocompatible and biodegradable polymers are considerably increasing. This is notably in force for practically water insoluble drugs to be applied in liquid forms (eye solutions for an example). The aim of the work presented was the preparation of model poly(vinyl acetate) and poly(styrene) nanosupports for indometacin and their potential inclusion in eye drops. The polymers are synthesized as nanosized latex by a radical polymerization of the monomers in the presence of indometacin. It is proved that the low polymerization temperature and initiator used do not influence indometacin structure and properties. The nanoparticles were characterized by attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic analyses, atomic force microscopy, scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy. The size of the latex particles was around 200 nm, determined by the scan electron microscopy. The indometacin delivery rate from the supports discussed in aqueous solutions was determined at pH 7.4. The change of this rate, in comparison with that for a pure drug substance, was established also as well as its dependence on the nature of the carrier.
Eye drop formulations containing indometacin and benzalkonium salt often show an opalescence as a result of ion-pair formation. The insoluble ion pair was isolated and characterized by infrared and ultraviolet spectroscopy and thin layer chromatography. This ion pair is also responsible for the bad assay results of benzalkonium using the ion-pair extraction method with bromothymol blue as counterion. The distribution constant (KD = 1O4) of indometacin and the extraction constant (Kex = 3 X 1O4) of the ion pair indometacin-benzalkonium in a water-chloroform system at various pH values were determined. A discussion on the preservation of indometacin eye drop formulations with benzalkonium salt in view of this chemical incompatibility is presented.
BACKGROUND: Nitrogen mustard (N-mustard) compounds are considered important anticancer drugs. Various transporting agents have been utilised to carry N-mustard groups including coumarins, amides, polyaromatic molecules and cycloalkyl structures. N-mustards act as bifunctional alkylating agents that induce cross-linking within DNA strands and cytotoxic activity. Compounds that transport the N-mustard group in vivo can also express drug-likeness that can have advantages in clinical application. This study presents data on two anticancer drugs with N-mustard groups covalently attached to NSAIDs. METHODS: Two alkylating compounds were synthesised by covalently attaching a single N-mustard group to 2-2-acetoxybenzoylaminonicotinic acid (for compound I) and indometacin (for compound II). Molecular properties such as aqueous solubility, 1-octanol/water partitioning coefficient (log Kow), molar volume, polar surface area, 1-octanol/water partitioning at pH values other than human blood (log D) and the dermal permeability coefficient (Kp) were determined. The rate-order of reaction and rate constant of alkylation were determined by reacting compound I and compound II with a target compound having a primary amine group in buffered aqueous solution at blood pH 7.4 and 37 masculineC, and monitoring absorbance at 400nm. RESULTS AND C onclusion: Compounds I and II were stable at room temperature, soluble in water and effectively alkylated a nucleophilic primary amine target at physiological temperature and pH. The water solubility of compound I was considerably greater than that of compound II. Both compounds showed second-order rate order of alkylation and effectively alkylated a nucleophilic target under aqueous physiological conditions of pH 7.4 and 37 masculineC. Kp values for compounds I and II were determined to be 0.000786 cm/h and 0.024 cm/h, respectively. Both compound I and compound II had zero percent ionisation at pH 7.4, and compound I showed zero violations of the Rule of 5. Log P values for compounds I and II were 3.27 and 5.08, respectively. This study describes the benefits of antineoplastic agents with NSAID substituents that provide favourable pharmacological properties.
Evidence of the existence of two forms of cyclooxygenases and the clinical relevance of COX-2 inhibition led to the development of COX-2 selective NSAIDs. In order to evaluate this selectivity, we have developed and validated an enzymatic method. The precision and reproducibility of the assay were determined and COX-2 selectivity examined using nimesulide and indometacin.
A column liquid chromatographic (LC) method using UV detection for the determination of acemetacin and its metabolite indometacin in blood is described. The lower detection limit for both compounds is ca. 25 micrograms/l, the precision (coefficient of variation) is 6% for acemetacin and 10% for indometacin. The method is also suited for determination of both compounds in plasma, precisions in this case are even better than for blood, i.e. around 3% for both acemetacin and indometacin. Blood samples of three volunteers who had received 90 mg of acemetacin orally were analysed using the new method and very good agreement with results from a thin-layer chromatographic/fluorescence method was found.
