Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular bacteria with two distinct morphological stages, the infectious elementary bodies (EBs) and non-infectious reticulate bodies (RBs). Here we describe a rapid and straightforward protocol for the purification of EBs and RBs involving special density gradients. It has been successfully applied to three chlamydial species.
As yeast are starved of nutrients, they enter G0, a quiescent state. Quiescent yeast (Q) cells retain viability for extended periods of time and resume growth following supplementation of missing nutrients. As such, Q cells have become a valuable model for studying longevity and self-renewal of chronologically aged cells. Traditional isolation of Q cells involves a relatively long centrifugation time through a continuous density gradient. Here, we describe a rapid and cost-effective Q-cell isolation technique that uses a single-density, one-step gradient prepared from media containing iodixanol.
This rapid and efficient method to prepare highly purified recombinant adeno-associated viruses (rAAVs) is based on binding of negatively charged rAAV capsids to an anion-exchange resin that is pH dependent.
Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (Map) is a potential human pathogen known to be present in raw milk from infected dairy herds. Current pasteurisation regimes do not totally inactivate Map resulting in the possibility of viable cells being present in pasteurised milk used for Cheddar cheese production. A laboratory-based method, ensuring strict safety precautions, was developed to manufacture 800-g Cheddar blocks, experimentally contaminated (postpasteurisation) with two different strains of Map. The composition of the model Cheddar produced was consistent with commercial product. Syneresis of the cheese curd caused a 1 log10 concentration of Map numbers from milk to cheese for a strain isolated from pasteurised milk. The type strain NCTC 8578 did not show a similar concentration effect, but did however survive the Cheddar manufacturing process. A small percentage (<5%) of the Map load for each strain was recovered in the whey fraction during the process.
The formation of self-generated gradients of iodixanol from a solution of uniform concentration requires the use of vertical or near-vertical rotors. The density profile that is generated depends upon the sedimentation path length of the rotor, centrifugation time, RCF and temperature. Modulation of the starting concentration changes the density range of the gradient. This Protocol Article illustrates the effect of these parameters on gradient shape in a few selected rotors. Because the gradients are formed by the centrifugal field, they are highly reproducible and easy to execute.
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is an acute sterile pustular eruption most commonly induced by medications. Although antibiotics are the most commonly accused drugs in AGEP, non-antibiotic agents may also cause this disease. We present a case of AGEP following use of iodixanol for coronary angiography in a 61-year-old woman. Given the wide use of this substance in cardiology, clinicians should be aware of this potential complication.
BACKGROUND: Despite the potential benefits of percutaneous procedures for the assessment and treatment of coronary artery disease, these interventions require the use of iodine contrast, which might lead to contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) and increased risk of dialysis and major adverse cardiac events (MACE). AIMS: We sought to compare two different iodine contrasts (low vs. iso-osmolar) for the prevention of CIN among high-risk patients. METHODS: This is a single-center, randomized (1:1) trial comparing consecutive patients at high risk for CIN referred to percutaneous coronary diagnostic and/or therapeutic procedures with low (ioxaglate) vs. iso-osmolarity (iodixanol) iodine contrast. High risk was defined by the presence of at least one of the following conditions: age >70 years, diabetes mellitus, non-dialytic chronic kidney disease, chronic heart failure, cardiogenic shock, and acute coronary syndrome (ACS). The primary endpoint was the occurrence of CIN, defined as a >25% relative increase and/or >0.5 mg/dL absolute increase in creatinine (Cr) levels compared with baseline between the 2nd and 5th day after contrast media administration. RESULTS: A total of 2,268 patients were enrolled. Mean age was 67 years. Diabetes mellitus (53%), non-dialytic chronic kidney disease (31%), and ACS (39%) were highly prevalent. The mean volume of contrast media was 89 ml +/- 48.6. CIN occurred in 15% of all patients, with no significant difference regarding the type of contrast used (iso = 15.2% vs. low = 15.1%, P>.99). Differences were not observed in specific subgroups such as diabetics, elderly, and ACS patients. At 30-day follow-up, 13 patients in the iso-osmolarity group and 11 in low-osmolarity group required dialysis (P =.8). There were 37 (3.3%) deaths in the iso-osmolarity cohort vs. 29 (2.6%) in the low-osmolarity group (P =.4). CONCLUSION: Among patients at high risk for CIN, the incidence of this complication was 15%, and independent of the use of low- or iso-osmolar contrast.
In order to compare the effects of iopromide and isoxazole on postoperative contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with renal insufficiency, the paper searches for randomized controlled trials and retrospective cohort studies comparing the effects of iopromide and iodixanol on renal function in patients with renal insufficiency after surgery. The data are extracted from eligible studies. We tried to assess the incidence of contrast-agent nephropathy, preoperative and postoperative serum creatinine indicators, and mortality. This paper includes 8 studies with a total of 1243 patients. The incidence of contrast-induced nephropathy in the iopromide group is higher than that in the iodixanol group, and there is no significant difference between the two groups in postoperative mortality and preoperative serum creatinine expression. Sensitivity analysis and funnel chart show that our research is robust and has low publication bias. Our research shows that in patients with renal insufficiency, the incidence of contrast-medium nephropathy in the iopromide group is higher than that in the iodixanol group. Iodixanol is safer and has less effect on patients' serum creatinine levels.
BACKGROUND: The use of contrast agents during coronary angiography can result in contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN), particularly in patients with renal dysfunction. On the contrary, different contrast agents can induce different degree of changes in cardiac function. The objective of our meta-analysis was to compare the clinical safety of iso-osmolar contrast medium iodixanol to low-osmolar contrast medium iopromide in patients with renal insufficiency undergoing coronary angiography with or without percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). METHODS: We searched Medline, Embase, Cochrane Library, and reference lists to identify randomized controlled trials that compared iodixanol to iopromide with the incidence of CIN as an endpoint in renal impaired patients undergoing coronary angiography. Outcome measures were the incidence of CIN, absolute peak serum creatinine (Scr) increase from baseline and a composite of cardiovascular adverse events. RESULTS: A total of 8 trials with 3532 patients were pooled; 1759 patients received iodixanol and 1773 patients received iopromide. There was no significant difference in the incidence of CIN (summary odds ratio [OR] 0.50, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.19-1.35, P = .17) and peak Scr increase (mean difference -0.01 mg/dL, 95% CI -0.08 to 0.05, P = .69) when iodixanol was compared with iopromide. But iodixanol was associated with a statistically significant reduction in cardiovascular adverse events when compared with iopromide (OR 0.47, 95% CI 0.30-0.73, P = .0009). CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of pooled data from 8 randomized controlled trials of iodixanol against iopromide in patients with renal insufficiency undergoing coronary angiography with or without PCI showed that iodixanol nonsignificantly reduced the incidence of CIN, but was associated with a significantly reduced risk of cardiovascular adverse events when compared with iopromide.
OBJECTIVES: Iodixanol contrast media with different doses using computed tomography angiography (CTA) and perfusion (CTP) to diagnose coronary artery disease (CAD) in overweight patients lacks assessment. Our study compared iodixanol 320 mg I/ml and 270 mg I/ml on image quality and accuracy of CTA combined CTP (CTA-CTP) to diagnose CAD. METHODS: Overweight patients with suspected of CAD were randomized into iodixanol 270 group (received iodixanol 270 mg I/ml) and iodixanol 320 group (received iodixanol 320 mg I/ml). Based on these characteristics data, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and corresponding area under the curve (AUC) were plotted to assess the sensitivity and specificity of the two administrations. RESULTS: The subjective definition score, signal to noise ratio, and CT value of aorta in iodixanol 320 group were higher than iodixanol 270 group. In iodixanol 270 group: the image exhibited a normal state of both vessels and myocardial perfusion; and the AUC, specificity, and sensitivity were 0.376, 66.67, and 80.46, respectively. In iodixanol 320 group: the image exhibited a diameter stenosis in right coronary artery and myocardial infarction of inferior wall and proximal inferior wall septum, as well as myocardial perfusion defects; and the AUC, specificity, and sensitivity in iodixanol 320 group were 0.824, 75.00, and 89.87, respectively. CONCLUSION: Accuracy and image quality of iodixanol 320 mg I/ml in the diagnosis of CAD with CTA-CTP was higher than using iodixanol 270 mg I/ml.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: There are some problems, such as unclear pathological mechanism, delayed diagnosis, and inaccurate therapeutic target of Contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI). It is significantly important to find biomarkers and therapeutic targets that can indicate renal injury in the early stage of CI-AKI. This study aims to establish a multiple-metabolites model to predict preliminary renal injury induced by iodixanol and explore its pathogenesis. METHODS: Both UHPLC/Q-Orbitrap-MS and (1)H-NMR methods were applied for urine metabolomics studies on two independent cohorts who suffered from a preliminary renal injury caused by iodixanol, and the multivariate statistical analysis and random forest (RF) algorithm were used to process the related date. RESULTS: In the discovery cohort (n = 169), 6 metabolic markers (leucine, indole, 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan, N-acetylvaline, hydroxyhexanoycarnine, and kynurenic acid) were obtained by the cross-validation between the RF and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Secondly, the 6 differential metabolites were confirmed by comparison of standard substance and structural identification of (1)H-NMR. Subsequently, the multiple-metabolites model composed of the 6 biomarkers was validated in a validation cohort (n = 165). CONCLUSIONS: The concentrations of leucine, indole, N-acetylvaline, 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan, hydroxyhexanoycarnitine and kynurenic acid in urine were proven to be positively correlated with the degree of renal injury induced by iodixanol. The multiple-metabolites model based on these 6 biomarkers has a good predictive ability to predict early renal injury caused by iodixanol, provides treatment direction for injury intervention and a reference for reducing the incidence of clinical CI-AKI further.
