Context The rate of co-infection of HIV/Tuberculosis is increasing alarmingly. This calls for a drug delivery approach targeting both diseases. Objective The study aims to investigate co-loading of isoniazid, an antitubercular drug and lamivudine an antiretroviral drug, into polymeric microspheres for simultaneous treatment of both diseases. Materials and methods Microspheres were prepared by o/o emulsion solvent evaporation method by employing ethylcellulose and eudragit RS 100 as polymers. The prepared formulation was suitably characterized for FTIR, DSC, percent yield, loose surface crystals, entrapment efficiency, and in vitro studies. The surface morphology of microspheres was observed using digital microscope and scanning electron microscope. Cell viability study was done on Caco-2 cells. Results and discussion FTIR and DSC studies demonstrated compatibility and stability of excipients. Microscopy studies revealed that particles were spherical in shape and distributed over a range of 120-270 mum. Percent yield, LSC and %EE have shown promising results. In vitro release showed biphasic release pattern with sustained release up to 12 h. Mechanism of drug release followed Higuchi Kinetics and non-fickian release behaviour. The formulation containing drug/polymer ratio 1:2 and EU/EC of 1:1 showed optimum response in context to achievement of controlled release. The cell viability studies showed that the prepared system had no toxic effect on intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cells. Conclusion Polymeric microspheres were prepared and suitably characterized for simultaneous delivery of two drugs. This matrix system could be used for better therapeutic outcome in this deadly co-infection.
The formation of isonicotinyl-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (INH-NAD(+)) by the mycobacterial catalase-peroxidase enzyme, KatG, was known to be the major component of the mode of action of isoniazid (INH), an anti-tuberculosis drug. However, there are other enzymes that may catalyze this reaction. We have previously reported that neutrophil myeloperoxidase (MPO) is capable of metabolizing INH through the formation of INH-NAD(+) adduct, which could be attributed to being a possible mode of action of INH. However, eosinophilic infiltration of the lungs is more pronounced and characteristic of granulomas in Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected patients. Thus, the aim of the present study is to investigate the role of eosinophil peroxidase (EPO), a key eosinophil enzyme, during INH metabolism and the formation of its active metabolite, INH-NAD(+) using purified EPO and eosinophils isolated from asthmatic donors. UV-Vis spectroscopy revealed INH oxidation by EPO led to a new product (lambda(max) = 326 nm) in the presence of NAD(+). This adduct was confirmed to be INH-NAD(+) using LC-MS analysis where the intact adduct was detected (m/z = 769). Furthermore, EPO catalyzed the oxidation of INH and formed several free radical intermediates as assessed by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spin-trapping; a carbon-centred radical, which is considered to be the reactive metabolite that binds with NAD(+), was found when superoxide dismutase was included in the reaction. Our findings suggest that eosinophilic EPO may also play a role in the pharmacological activity of INH through the formation of INH-NAD(+) adduct, and supports further evidence that human cells and enzymes are capable of producing the active metabolite involved in tuberculosis treatment.
A new polymorph of the cinnamic acid-isoniazid cocrystal has been prepared by slow evaporation, namely cinnamic acid-pyridine-4-carbohydrazide (1/1), C9H8O2.C6H7N3O. The crystal structure is characterized by a hydrogen-bonded tetrameric arrangement of two molecules of isoniazid and two of cinnamic acid. Possible modification of the hydrogen bonding was investigated by changing the hydrazide group of isoniazid via an in situ reaction with acetone and cocrystallization with cinnamic acid. In the structure of cinnamic acid-N'-(propan-2-ylidene)isonicotinohydrazide (1/1), C9H8O2.C9H11N3O, carboxylic acid-pyridine O-H...N and hydrazide-hydrazide N-H...O hydrogen bonds are formed.
Pellagra is characterized by dermatitis, diarrhea, dementia and eventually death occurring as a result of niacin or its precursor tryptophan deficiency. Although pellagra is a well-known complication of isoniazid (INH) therapy, the clinical diagnosis may be missed or delayed that may cause life-threatening consequences. Due to the diversity of pellagra-related signs and symptoms, the diagnosis can be made with an appropriate index of suspicion. We report a 7-year-old boy presenting with INH-induced pellagra that resolved after the administration of the niacin therapy.
INTRODUCTION: Traditionally, single critical concentrations of drugs are utilized for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) drug susceptibility testing (DST); however, the level of drug resistance can impact treatment choices and outcomes. Mutations at the katG gene are the major genetic mutations in multidrug resistant (MDR) Mtb and usually associated with high level resistance. We assessed the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of MDR or rifampin resistant (RR) and isoniazid (INH) resistant Mtb isolates to determine the quantification of drug resistance among key anti-tuberculosis drugs. METHODS: The study was conducted on stored Mtb isolates collected as part of a national drug resistance survey in Ethiopia. MIC values were determined using Sensititre MYCOTB plates. A line probe assay (MTBDRplus) was also performed to identify genetic determinants of resistance for all isolates. RESULTS: MIC testing was performed on 74 Mtb isolates including 46 MDR, 2 RR and 26 INH phenotypically resistant isolates as determined by the Lowenstein Jensen (LJ) method. Four (15%) INH resistant Mtb isolates were detected as borderline rifampin resistance (MIC = 1 mug/ml) using MYCOTB MIC plates and no rifampin resistance mutations were detected by LPA. Among the 48 MDR/RR TB cases, 9 (19%) were rifabutin susceptible (MIC was between </=0.25 and 0.5mug/ml). Additionally, the MIC for isoniazid was between 2-4 mug/ml (moderate resistance) for 58% of MDR TB isolates and 95.6% (n = 25) of the isolates had mutations at the katG gene. CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest a role for rifabutin treatment in a subset of RR TB patients, thus potentially preserving an important drug class. The high proportion of moderate level INH resistant among MDR Mtb isolates indicates the potential benefit of high dose isoniazid treatment in a high proportion of katG gene harboring MDR Mtb isolates.
BACKGROUND: Isoniazid (INH), a key drug of antituberculosis therapy, is metabolized by arylamine N-acetyltransferase2 (NAT2), cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) and glutathione S-transferase (GST). We studied the possible influence of genetic polymorphisms of INH-metabolizing enzymes on serum concentrations of INH and its metabolites, as well as on the incidence of hepatotoxicity. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 144 tuberculosis patients who received antituberculosis treatment were followed prospectively. Their NAT, CYP2E1 and GST genotypes were determined using a polymerase chain reaction with restriction fragment length polymorphism method. Blood samples were collected from the patients and serum concentrations were determined by HPLC. The severity of hepatotoxicity was judged by the increases in either aspartate aminotransferase or alanine aminotransferase levels from the upper limit of the corresponding normal range. RESULTS: Incidence of hepatotoxicity was highest in pulmonary tuberculosis patients with the slow acetylator (SA) phenotype and lowest in those with the rapid acetylator (RA) phenotype, although no clear relationship of genetic polymorphism of INH-metabolizing enzymes on the severity of hepatotoxicity were confirmed. CONCLUSION: The risk of side-effects, such as hepatic disorder, may rise in these patients with an SA phenotype, because of an increase in serum INH concentration. The evidence presented in this study, albeit based on the examination of a low number of patients, suggests that a safe INH dosage for tuberculosis patients with SA phenotype should be less than the dosage which is usually recommended for tuberculosis patients.
Pyrazinamide and isoniazid, as two first-line anti-tuberculosis drugs, are investigated by terahertz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS). Both pyrazinamide and isoniazid have three absorption peaks, at 0.50, 0.71, 1.42 THz and 1.16, 1.46, 1.56 THz, respectively, which can be used as the basis for qualitative identification of these two drugs. In order to gain insight into the origin of the characteristic absorption peaks, density functional theory (DFT) based on single molecular, dimer, and crystalline structures of pyrazinamide and isoniazid are performed. The purpose of the calculation based on the single molecular structure is to understand the intramolecular interaction, while those based on the dimer and crystalline structures are to investigate the intermolecular interactions in PNZ and INZ. Comparing the theoretical results of the dimer and crystalline based structures reveals that the crystalline structure leads to vibrational spectra that are closer to the experimental values in terms of the number of absorption peaks and the positions of the absorption peaks. Vibrational mode assignments can be summarized as that the characteristic absorption peaks of pyrazinamide mainly come from intermolecular interaction, and the characteristic absorption peaks of isoniazid originate from both the intramolecular and intermolecular interactions. Our experimental and theoretical results indicate that the combination of THz-TDS with DFT is an effective approach for identification of molecules with pharmaceutical significance.
Tuberculosis is an ancient disease of mankind, and its causative bacterium is Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Isoniazid is one of the most effective first-line antituberculosis drugs. As prodrugs, it and its derivative ethionamide act on enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase (InhA) after being oxidized in bacteria, and kill the bacteria by inhibiting the formation of M. tuberculosis cell walls. However, the S94A mutation of InhA causes M. tuberculosis to develop cross-resistance to isoniazid and ethionamide. This work is dedicated to studying the cross-resistance mechanism of isoniazid and ethionamide through theoretical calculations. First, thermodynamic integral simulations are used to accurately calculate the relative binding energy of two drugs in the mutant and wild-type system. Furthermore, through classic molecular dynamic simulations and molecular mechanics generalized-Born surface area calculation, some key residues are identified and the binding affinity of isoniazid and ethionamide reduced by 9-13 kcal/mol due to S94A mutation. The hydrogen bond between Ala94 and isoniazid (ethionamide) disappeared and the energy contribution of Ala94 decreased after the mutation. In addition, the dynamic network analysis indicated that the mutation of Ser94 also indirectly affected the conformation of key residues such as Met147, Thr196, and Leu97, resulting in a reduction in the energy contribution of these residues. Finally, the binding conformation of isoniazid and ethionamide has also undergone major changes. The obtained results could provide valuable information for the future molecular design to overcome the drug resistance.
The ability of Archaea to adapt their membrane lipid compositions to extreme environments has brought in archaeosomes into consideration for the development of drug delivery systems overcoming the physical, biological blockades that the body exhibits against drug therapies. In this study, we prepared unilamellar archaeosomes, from the polar lipid fraction extracted from Haloarcula 2TK2 strain, and explored its potential as a drug delivery vehicle. Rifampicin and isoniazid which are conventional drugs in tuberculosis medication were loaded separately and together in the same archaeosome formulation for the benefits of the combined therapy. Particle size and zeta potential of archaeosomes were measured by photon correlation spectroscopy, and the morphology was assessed by with an atomic force microscope. Encapsulation efficiency and loading capacities of the drugs were determined, and in vitro drug releases were monitored spectrophotometrically. Our study demonstrates that rifampicin and isoniazid could be successfully loaded separately and together in archaeosomes with reasonable drug-loading and desired vesicle-specific characters. Both of the drugs had greater affinity for archaeosomes than a conventional liposome formulation. The results imply that archaeosomes prepared from extremely halophilic archaeon were compatible with the liposomes for the development of stable and sustained release of antituberculosis drugs.
The effects of drug concentration in internal aqueous phase of stabilized w/o/w emulsion and additives in oleaginous phase on release characteristics of isoniazid were investigated. The release was significantly effected by both of the formulation variables. The release was enhanced initially with increasing concentration of drug in internal aqueous phase followed by a steady release at high concentration of isoniazid. The release declined substantially in the presence of aluminum tristearate, cetostearyl alcohol, and cholesterol, and it increased with egg lecithin and oleic acid in oily phase. The bioavailability was increased with a multiple-emulsion formulation.
Isoniazid is the most effective and widely used antituberculosis drug. The metabolism of isoniazid is noninducible and the primary metabolic route determining the rate at which isoniazid is eliminated from the body is acetylation. There are large diffrences between individuals in the rates at which isoniazid and certain other hydrazides and some sulfonamides are acetylated. The acetylation of isoniazid is inherited in a simple Mendelian fashion, individuals being either slow, heterozygous rapid, or homozygous rapid acetylators. Improved methods of discriminating between the different phenotypes have recently been described that are also more convenient to use. The proportion of slow acetylators among Japanese and Eskimos is about 10%; among Chinese about 20%; among Caucasians, Negroes, and South Indians about 60%. The results of a series of meticulously controlled clinical trials carried out in India, East Africa, Hong Kong, Singapore, Czechoslovakia, and Britain have shown the isoniazid acetylator status of tuberculosis patients treated with isoniazid-containing regimens is of no prognostic significance when treatment is given on daily basis. It may, however, be of significance when twice-weekly regimens are employed, especially in circumstances in which only a short period of initial daily chemotherapy is given, and where the companion drug employed during the twice-weekly continuation phase is relatively weak. The acetylator phenotype is, however, extremely important in once-weekly treatment, rapid acetylators always having fared considerably worse than slow acetylators on all the regimens evaluated so far. Experimental studies of the action of isoniazid against Mycobacterium tuberculosis in vitro and in vivo have enabled these findings to be understood.
A method for the determination of rifampicin, desacetylrifampicin, isoniazid, and acetylisoniazid by high-performance liquid chromatography and using the same extract of the same sample is reported. After protein precipitation and extraction of these antituberculous drugs, two reversed-phase chromatographies were necessary. The technique was applied to serum extracts, polymorphonucleocytes and alveolar macrophages from patients treated for tuberculosis.
The aim of the present work was to produce 3D-printed oral dosage forms with a sufficient drug dose displaying various release profiles. Hot-melt extrusion was utilized to produce drug-loaded feedstock material that was subsequently 3D-printed into 6, 8, and 10 x 2.5 mm tablets with 15% and 90% infill levels. The prepared formulations contained 30% (w/w) isoniazid in combination with one or multiple pharmaceutical polymers possessing suitable properties for oral drug delivery. Thirteen formulations were successfully hot-melt extruded of which eight had properties suitable for fused deposition modeling 3D printing. Formulations containing HPC were found to be superior regarding printability in this study. Filaments with a breaking distance below 1.5 mm were observed to be too brittle to be fed into the printer. In addition, filaments with high moisture uptake at high relative humidity generally failed to be printable. Different release profiles for the 3D-printed tablets were obtained as a result of using different polymers in the printed formulations. For 8 mm tablets printed with 90% infill, 80% isoniazid release was observed between 40 and 852 min. Drug release characteristics could further be altered by changing the infill or the size of the printed tablets allowing personalization of the tablets. This study presents novel formulations containing isoniazid for prevention of latent tuberculosis and investigates 3D printing technology for personalized production of oral solid dosage forms enabling adjustable dose and drug release properties.
Biotransformation of isoniazid produced isonicotinic acid (1), isonicotinic acid N-oxide (2), and isonicotinamide (3) which were isolated by column chromatography using silica gel and Sephadex LH 20 and elucidated using various spectroscopies. This is the first report for isolation of 2(.) Antituberculosis activity was evaluated against Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains: drug sensitive (DS), multiple drug resistant (MDR) and extensively drug resistant (XDR). 1-3 and isoniazid showed MICs of 63.49, 0.22, 15.98 and 0.88 microM, respectively, against the DS strain. For the MDR strain, 2 and 3 exhibited MICs of 28.06 and > 1000 microM, respectively, while 1 was inactive. Moreover, 2 had an MIC of 56.19 microM against XDR strain, while 1 and 3 were inactive. Docking simulation using enoyl ACP reductase (InhA) revealed favorable protein-ligand interactions. In silico study of pharmacokinetics and hepatotoxicity predicted 1-3 to have good oral bioavailability and 2 to have a lower hepatoxicity probability than isoniazid.
OBJECTIVE: Contacts of pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) cases are at high risk of TB infection and progression to disease. Close and household contacts and those <5 years old have the highest risk. Isoniazid preventive therapy (IPT) can largely prevent TB disease among infected individuals. International and Peruvian recommendations include TB contact investigation and IPT prescription to eligible contacts. We conducted a study in Lima, Peru, to determine the number of close and household contacts who were evaluated, started on IPT, and who completed it, and the factors associated to compliance with national guidelines. METHODS: We conducted a longitudinal retrospective study including all TB cases diagnosed between January 2015 and July 2016 in 13 health facilities in south Lima. Treatment cards, TB registers and clinical files were reviewed and data on index cases (sex, age, smear status, TB treatment outcome), contact investigation (sex, age, kinship to the index case, evaluations at month 0, 2 and 6) and health facility (number of TB cases notified per year, proportion of TB cases with treatment success) were extracted. We tabulated frequencies of contact evaluation by contact and index case characteristics. To investigate determinants of IPT initiation and completion, we used generalised linear mixed models. RESULTS: A total of 2323 contacts were reported by 662 index cases; the median number of contacts per case was four (IQR, 2-5). Evaluation at month 0 was completed by 99.2% (255/257) of contacts <5 and 98.1% (558/569) of contacts aged 5-19 years. Of 191 eligible contacts <5 years old, 70.2% (134) started IPT and 31.4% (42) completed it. Of 395 contacts 5-19 years old, 36.7% (145) started IPT and 32.4% (47) completed it. Factors associated to not starting IPT among contacts <5 years old were being a second-degree relative to the index case (OR 6.6 95CI% 2.6-16.5), not having received a tuberculin skin test (TST) (OR 3.9 95%CI 1.4-10.8), being contact of a smear-negative index case (OR 5.5 95%CI 2.0-15.1) and attending a low-caseload health facility (OR 2.8 95%CI 1.3-6.2). Factors associated to not starting IPT among 5-19 year-olds were age (OR 13.7 95%CI 5.9-32.0 for 16-19 vs. 5-7 years old), being a second-degree relative (OR 3.0 95%CI 1.6-5.6), not having received a TST (OR 5.4, 95%CI 2.5-11.8), being contact of a male index case (OR 2.1 95CI% 1.2-3.5), with smear-negative TB (OR 1.9 95%CI 1.0-3.6), and attending a high-caseload health facility (OR 2.1 95%CI 1.2-3.6). Factors associated to not completing IPT, among contacts who started, were not having received a TST (OR 3.4 95%CI 1.5-7.9 for <5 year-olds, and OR 4.3 95%CI 1.7-10.8 for those 5-19 years old), being contact of an index case with TB treatment outcome other than success (OR 9.3 95%CI 2.6-33.8 for <5 year-olds and OR 15.3 95%CI 1.9-125.8 for those 5-19 years old), and, only for those 5-19 years old, attending a health facility with high caseload (OR 3.2 95%CI 1.4-7.7) and a health facility with low proportion of TB cases with treatment success (OR 4.4 95%CI 1.9-10.2). CONCLUSIONS: We found partial compliance to TB contact investigation, and identified contact, index case and health facility-related factors associated to IPT start and completion that can guide the TB programme in increasing coverage and quality of this fundamental activity.
Neutrophils ingest Mycobacteria tuberculosis (Mtb) in the lungs of infected individuals. During phagocytosis they use myeloperoxidase (MPO) to catalyze production of hypochlorous acid (HOCl), their most potent antimicrobial agent. Isoniazid (INH), the foremost antibiotic in the treatment of tuberculosis, is oxidized by MPO. It rapidly reduced compound I of MPO [k = (1.22 +/- 0.05) x 10(6) M(-1) s(-1)] but reacted less favorably with compound II [(9.8 +/- 0.6) x 10(2) M(-1) s(-1)]. Oxidation of INH by MPO and hydrogen peroxide was unaffected by chloride, the physiological substrate for compound I, and the enzyme was partially converted to compound III. This indicates that INH is oxidized outside the classical peroxidation cycle. In combination with superoxide dismutase (SOD), MPO oxidized INH without exogenous hydrogen peroxide. SOD must favor reduction of oxygen by the INH radical to give superoxide and ultimately hydrogen peroxide. In both oxidation systems, an adduct with methionine was formed and it was a major product with MPO and SOD. We show that it is a conjugate of an acyldiimide with amines. INH substantially inhibited HOCl production by MPO and neutrophils below pharmacological concentrations. The reversible inhibition is explained by diversion of MPO to its ferrous and compound III forms during oxidation of INH. MPO, along with SOD released by Mtb, will oxidize INH at sites of infection and their interactions are likely to limit the efficacy of the drug, promote adverse drug reactions via formation of protein adducts, and impair a major bacterial killing mechanism of neutrophils.
