Ketamine is an open channel blocker of ionotropic glutamatergic N-Methyl-D-Aspartate (NMDA) receptors. The discovery of its rapid antidepressant effects in patients with depression and treatment-resistant depression fostered novel effective treatments for mood disorders. This discovery not only provided new insight into the neurobiology of mood disorders but also uncovered fundamental synaptic plasticity mechanisms that underlie its treatment. In this review, we discuss key clinical aspects of ketamine's effect as a rapidly acting antidepressant, synaptic and circuit mechanisms underlying its action, as well as how these novel perspectives in clinical practice and synapse biology form a road map for future studies aimed at more effective treatments for neuropsychiatric disorders.
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a leading cause of suicide in the world. Monoamine-based antidepressant drugs are a primary line of treatment for this mental disorder, although the delayed response and incomplete efficacy in some patients highlight the need for improved therapeutic approaches. Over the past two decades, ketamine has shown rapid onset with sustained (up to several days) antidepressant effects in patients whose MDD has not responded to conventional antidepressant drugs. Recent preclinical studies have started to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of ketamine's antidepressant properties. Herein, we describe and compare recent clinical and preclinical findings to provide a broad perspective of the relevant mechanisms for the antidepressant action of ketamine.
BACKGROUND: Ketamine appears to have a therapeutic role in certain mental disorders, most notably depression. However, the comparative performance of different formulations of ketamine is less clear. OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to assess the comparative efficacy and tolerability of racemic and esketamine for the treatment of unipolar and bipolar major depression. DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis. DATA SOURCES: We searched PubMed, MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Clinical Trials, and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews for relevant studies published since database inception and December 17, 2019. STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: We considered randomized controlled trials examining racemic or esketamine for the treatment of unipolar or bipolar major depression. OUTCOMES: Primary outcomes were response and remission from depression, change in depression severity, suicidality, retention in treatment, drop-outs, and drop-outs due to adverse events. ANALYSIS: Evidence from randomized controlled trials was synthesized as rate ratios (RRs) for treatment response, disorder remission, adverse events, and withdrawals and as standardized mean differences (SMDs) for change in symptoms, via random-effects meta-analyses. FINDINGS: 24 trials representing 1877 participants were pooled. Racemic ketamine relative to esketamine demonstrated greater overall response (RR = 3.01 vs. RR = 1.38) and remission rates (RR = 3.70 vs. RR = 1.47), as well as lower dropouts (RR = 0.76 vs. RR = 1.37). CONCLUSIONS: Intravenous ketamine appears to be more efficacious than intranasal esketamine for the treatment of depression.
Ketamine is an anesthetic drug which is now used to treat chronic pain conditions and psychiatric disorders, especially depression. It is an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist with additional effects on alpha-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors, hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels, opioid receptors, and monoaminergic receptors. This article focuses on ketamine's role in treating depression and pain, two commonly comorbid challenging conditions with potentially shared neurobiologic circuitry. Many clinical trials have utilized intravenous or intranasal ketamine for treating depression and pain. Intravenous ketamine is more bioavailable than intranasal ketamine and both are effective for acute depressive episodes. Intravenous ketamine is advantageous for post-operative analgesia and is associated with a reduction in total opioid requirements. Few studies have treated chronic pain or concurrent depression and pain with ketamine. Larger, randomized control trials are needed to examine the safety and efficacy of intravenous vs. intranasal ketamine, ideal target populations, and optimal dosing to treat both depression and pain.
BACKGROUND: Racemic ketamine and esketamine have demonstrated rapid antidepressant effects. We aimed to review the efficacy and safety of racemic and esketamine for depression. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We conducted a PRISMA-guided review for relevant randomized controlled trials of racemic or esketamine for unipolar or bipolar major depression from database inception through 2021. We conducted random-effects meta-analyses using pooled rate ratios (RRs) and Cohen's standardized mean differences (d) with their 95% confidence intervals (CI). RESULTS: We found 36 studies (2903 participants, 57% female, 45.1 +/- 7.0 years). Nine trials used esketamine, while the rest used racemic ketamine. The overall study quality was high. Treatment with any form of ketamine was associated with improved response (RR=2.14; 95% CI, 1.72-2.66; I2=65%), remission (RR=1.64; 95% CI, 1.33-2.02; I2=39%), and depression severity (d=-0.63; 95% CI, -0.80 to -0.45; I2=78%) against placebo. Overall, there was no association between treatment with any form of ketamine and retention in treatment (RR=1.00; 95% CI, 0.99-1.01; I2<1%), dropouts due to adverse events (RR=1.56; 95% CI, 1.00-2.45; I2<1%), or the overall number of adverse events reported per participant (OR=2.14; 95% CI, 0.82-5.60; I2=62%) against placebo. CONCLUSIONS: Ketamine and esketamine are effective, safe, and acceptable treatments for individuals living with depression.
Over the last two decades, the dissociative anaesthetic agent ketamine, an uncompetitive N-Methyl-D-Aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, has emerged as a novel therapy for treatment-resistant depression (TRD), demonstrating rapid and robust antidepressant effects within hours of administration. Ketamine is a racemic mixture composed of equal amounts of (S)-ketamine and (R)-ketamine. Although ketamine currently remains an off-label treatment for TRD, an (S)-ketamine nasal spray has been approved for use in TRD (in conjunction with an oral antidepressant) in the United States and Europe. Despite the promise of ketamine, key challenges including how to maintain response, concerns regarding short and long-term side-effects and the potential for abuse remain. This review provides an overview of the history of ketamine, its use in psychiatry and its basic pharmacology. The clinical evidence for the use of ketamine in depression and potential adverse effects associated with treatment are summarized. A synopsis of some of the putative neurobiological mechanisms underlying ketamine's rapid-acting antidepressant effects is provided before finally outlining future research directions, including the need to identify biomarkers for predicting response and treatment targets that may be used in the development of next-generation rapid-acting antidepressants that may lack ketamine's side-effects or abuse potential.
OBJECTIVE: Intravenous (IV) racemic ketamine and intranasal (IN) esketamine have demonstrated rapid antidepressant effects in treatment-resistant depression (TRD). This systematic review aims to evaluate the efficacy and safety of ketamine and esketamine at various dosages for depression. METHODS: We included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with parallel group dose comparison of ketamine and esketamine for depression/TRD. Ovid Medline, Embase, PsycINFO, Scopus and Cochrane databases were searched. Standardized mean differences were calculated using Hedges'-g to complete random effects meta-analysis. The efficacy outcomes were changes in depression outcomes for IV ketamine and IN esketamine respectively. Safety was assessed by reported adverse effects. RESULTS: A random effects meta-analysis of studies (n = 12) showed efficacy in reducing depression symptoms with IV ketamine (Hedges'g = 1.52 [0.98-2.22], Z = 4.23, p < 0.001) and IN esketamine (Hedges' g = 0.31 [0.18-0.44], Z = 4.53, P < 0.001) compared to control/placebo. Treatment response was observed at IV ketamine doses </=0.2 mg/kg, >0.2-0.5 mg/kg and > 0.5 mg/kg. Higher IV ketamine doses (>0.5 mg/kg) did not lead to greater treatment response. Esketamine doses of 56-84 mg were superior to 28 mg dose. LIMITATIONS: Overall quality of evidence was low and limited by small number of studies. Publication bias was high. CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggests that IV ketamine may be efficacious at doses as low as 0.2 mg/kg, with increasing dose response at 0.5 mg/kg, without demonstrable increased benefit at 1 mg/kg, based on a small number of studies. Efficacy for IN esketamine increases with doses above 28 mg with best response being found between 56 and 84 mg for reducing depressive symptoms.
BACKGROUND: Intravenous racemic ketamine is a promising treatment for treatment-resistant depression. However, its clinical utility compared with intranasal esketamine and the other well-studied conventional pharmacological interventions (i.e., aripiprazole and lithium) as augmentative treatments for treatment-resistant unipolar depression in adults remains unclear. Therefore, we aimed to compare the efficacy, tolerability and acceptability of intravenous racemic ketamine with intranasal esketamine, aripiprazole and lithium under such conditions. METHODS: The Cochrane Library, PubMed, CINHAL and ClinicalTrials.gov databases were systematically searched from their inception to 10 May 2023. Randomised controlled trials evaluating these drugs were included. A random-effects network meta-analysis was also performed. RESULTS: In the primary analysis, all four drugs were significantly more effective than placebo. In addition, intravenous racemic ketamine was significantly more effective and acceptable than intranasal esketamine and aripiprazole. Intravenous racemic ketamine was not significantly different from placebo in tolerability, whereas intranasal esketamine and aripiprazole were significantly less tolerable than placebo. Lithium did not differ significantly from intravenous racemic ketamine in efficacy, tolerability and acceptability. LIMITATIONS: The sample size of patients treated with intravenous racemic ketamine was small. CONCLUSIONS: Intravenous racemic ketamine may be a better augmentative treatment for treatment-resistant unipolar depression than intranasal esketamine and aripiprazole. Whether intravenous racemic ketamine or lithium is superior is unclear currently. A larger head-to-head trial of intravenous racemic ketamine versus conventional augmentative treatments for treatment-resistant unipolar depression is needed.
Ketamine and esketamine have rapid-onset antidepressant effects and may be considered for the management of treatment-resistant depression. Intranasal esketamine has regulatory approval in the United States and European Union. Intravenous ketamine is often administered off-label as an antidepressant, though no standard operating procedures exist. Repeated administrations and the use of a concurrent standard antidepressant may maintain antidepressant effects of ketamine/esketamine. Possible adverse effects of ketamine and esketamine include psychiatric, cardiovascular, neurologic and genitourinary effects, and the potential for abuse. The long-term safety and efficacy of ketamine/esketamine as antidepressants require further study.
INTRODUCTION: Ketamine can produce rapid-acting antidepressant effects. Esketamine (Spravato), the S-enantiomer of racemic ketamine, was approved by the FDA for treatment-resistant depression in 2019. Here we review what is known about the long-term safety of both racemic ketamine and esketamine as therapies for psychiatric disorders. AREAS COVERED: In this article, we conducted a safety review of ketamine and esketamine. In looking at ketamine and esketamine long-term safety effects, we considered data available from experimental studies and several phase-three clinical trials. EXPERT OPINION: Based on available data, the most common side effects of ketamine/esketamine are generally transient, mild, and self-limited. These include dissociation, nausea, headache, elevated heart rate, and blood pressure. Treatment with esketamine may lead to an increased risk of lower urinary tract symptoms, such as dysuria or urgency. However, severe bladder pathology has not been reported among patients receiving doses of esketamine/ketamine in line with prescribing guidelines for depression. There is considerable data that ketamine at high doses can lead to long-term impairments in cognition. However, the esketamine clinical trials found that cognition generally remains stable or improves over time, suggesting that when used appropriately, there is no increased risk of cognitive impairment.
More data on the long-term effects of Racemic Ketamine and Esketamine in TDR patients is needed. The implementation of centralized registries of their use for treatment of depression could be a tool of major importance for assessing their efficacy and safety in real-world clinical practice. This paper seeks to outline the rise and rationale behind these registry-based surveillance systems.
Major depressive disorder is the greatest burden of developed countries in the context of morbidity caused by mental disorders. Until recent, ketamine has been mostly used for anesthesia, analgesia, sedation and treatment of chronic pain syndromes. However, unique pharmacodynamic properties of ketamine have increased interests in it's use for treatment of depression. It is assumed that ketamine reverses synaptic chronic stress pathology within one day of administration by postsynaptic glutamate activation, providing synaptic connectivity restoration that last for days or weeks. Potential glutamatergic agents, in context of treatment of major depressive disorder are not entirely novel phenomenon. Considering the aforementioned, current neurobiological view of depression as a solely monoaminergic phenomenon should be reassessed in order to prompt discovery of putative antidepressant drugs of novel generation. Acute side effects, such as increased salivation, increase in heart rate, systemic arterial pressure and intracranial pressure necessitate careful monitoring during intravenous administration of ketamine, even in subanesthetic doses. However, major burden of ketamine administration lies in it's ability to produce psychotomimetic side effects and emergence delirium. Esketamine nasal spray has now been widely approved and is considered safe in terms of acute side effects, tolerability and consistent therapeutic benefit.
In major depression, remission rate in response to monoaminergic antidepressant is around 50%. The lack of strong synergies between classical antidepressants and psychotherapy may be due to the molecular effects of classical antidepressants. They modulate synapses but they do not substantially influence synaptogenesis. They also increase brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). However, for activity-dependent plasticity, BDNF release has to work in concert with activation of synaptogenesis. There has been considerable excitement about ketamine's antidepressant effect. Ketamine leads to fast changes in synaptic function and plasticity that go well beyond effects of classical antidepressants. As a result, ketamine may turn out to have the capacity to considerably enhance the effects of psychotherapy. Such enhancing effects may become an important clinical indication for ketamine since its purely pharmacological effect is transient. This editorial outlines some mechanistic hypotheses, how Behavioral Activation, Trauma-Focused Psychotherapies and Humanistic Psychotherapy may specifically prolong ketamine's antidepressant effects.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to explore relationships of acute dissociative effects of intravenous ketamine with change in depression and suicidal ideation and with plasma metabolite levels in a randomized, midazolam-controlled trial. METHODS: Data from a completed trial in suicidal, depressed participants (n = 40) randomly assigned to ketamine was used to examine relationships between ketamine treatment-emergent dissociative and psychotomimetic symptoms with pre/post-infusion changes in suicidal ideation and depression severity. Nonparametric correlational statistics were used. These methods were also used to explore associations between dissociative or psychotomimetic symptoms and blood levels of ketamine and metabolites in a subset of participants (n = 28) who provided blood samples immediately post-infusion. RESULTS: Neither acute dissociative nor psychotomimetic effects of ketamine were associated with changes in suicidal ideation or depressive symptoms from pre- to post-infusion. Norketamine had a trend-level, moderate inverse correlation with dissociative symptoms on Day 1 post-injection (P  = .064; P =.013 removing 1 outlier). Dehydronorketamine correlated with Clinician-Administered Dissociative States Scale scores at 40 minutes (P = .034), 230 minutes (P = .014), and Day 1 (P = .012). CONCLUSION: We did not find evidence that ketamine's acute, transient dissociative, or psychotomimetic effects are associated with its antidepressant or anti-suicidal ideation actions. The correlation of higher plasma norketamine with lower dissociative symptoms on Day 1 post-treatment suggests dissociation may be more an effect of the parent drug.
