The anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities of orally administered nimesulide and ketoprofen were assessed in a group of 71 paediatric patients (aged 7 to 14 years) with orthopaedic disorders. Both drugs had similar efficacy. The greatest advantage of nimesulide was its better tolerability: only 3 nimesulide-treated patients (8.6%) experienced side effects related to the drug, compared with 12 (33%) of the ketoprofen-treated children.
Fourteen patients with acute lumbar pain and cervico-brachial radicular pain were treated with a single oral dose of 100 mg ketoprofen. The analgesic effect of the substance was investigated, using an analog pain scale, in correlation with drug plasma levels. Blood samples were taken at zero, one-half, one, two, three, four, five, six, eight, and ten hours after oral administration of ketoprofen. On an average, pain was at its lowest two hours after the plasma level of ketoprofen was at its highest. Within the ten hour observation period, the maximum reduction in pain increased as the maximum plasma level rose. Five patients with a maximum plasma level greater than 9 microliter/ml experienced pain reduction of at least 50%.
Simple micellar electrokinetic chromatographic (MEKC) method was developed for the determination of ketoprofen as the active substance and methylparaben and propylparaben as preservatives in a semisolid pharmaceutical preparation. Separation was carried out with a fused silica capillary and UV detection at 200nm. Optimized background electrolyte was 50mM tricine buffer containing 30mM sodium dodecyl sulfate as surfactant and 15% (v/v) of methanol. Single separation took about 13min. No statistically significant differences were found when comparing the results with those of RP-HPLC method reported in literature.
The composition of a polymeric potential-determining phase for ketoprofen selective electrode has been determined and the following basic electrode parameters were examined: measurement range, slope characteristic, limit of detection, response time, lifetime and selectivity coefficients in relation to some organic and inorganic anions. The electrode have been used for ketoprofen determination in the range 25.43-25430 microg/mL.
Ketoprofen powder was encapsulated with Eudragit RL/RS polymer solutions in isopropanol-acetone 1:1, using a simple and rapid method. Microcapsules were prepared using Eudragit solutions with different RL/RS ratios. The encapsulation process produces free-flowing microcapsules with good drug content and marked decrease in dissolution rate. The retardation in release profile of ketoprofen from microcapsules was a function of the polymer ratio employed in the encapsulation process. In vitro release of ketoprofen from microcapsules either filled in gelatin capsules or compressed into tablets, using calcium sulphate as diluent, confirmed the efficiency of the encapsulation process for preparing prolonged release medication. A capsule formulation with optimum sustained-release profile was suggested.
Ketoprofen, a commonly used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), can enter farmland environments via sewage irrigation and manure application and is toxic to plants. However, there have been relatively few studies on the association of ketoprofen with nitrogen (N) assimilation and metabolic responses in plants. Accordingly, the goal of this study was to investigate the effects of ketoprofen on ATP synthesis and N assimilation in rice roots. The results showed that with increasing ketoprofen concentration, root vitality, respiration rate, ATP content, and H(+)-ATPase activity decreased and plasma membrane permeability increased. The expressions of OSA9, a family III H(+)-ATPase gene, and OSA6 and OSA10, family IV genes, were upregulated, indicating a response of the roots to ketoprofen. Nitrate, ammonium, and free amino acids content decreased with increased ketoprofen. The levels of enzymes involved in N metabolism, namely nitrate reductase, nitrite reductase, glutamine synthetase, glutamate synthetase, and glutamate dehydrogenase, also decreased under ketoprofen treatment. Principal component analysis revealed that ketoprofen treatment can significantly affect energy synthesis and nitrogen assimilation in rice roots, while these effects can be alleviated by the antioxidant response. Most of the metabolite contents increased, including amino acids, carbohydrates, and secondary metabolites. Key metabolic pathways, namely substance synthesis and energy metabolism, were found to be disrupted. Microbiome analysis showed that community diversity and richness of rice root microorganisms in solution increased with increasing levels of ketoprofen treatment, and the microbial community structure and metabolic pathways significantly changed. The results of this study provides new insights into the response of rice roots to ketoprofen.
Ketoprofen, 2-(3-benzoylphenyl)-propionic acid, a widely used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, is considered as an important water pollutant. Kinetics and mechanism of its photolytic transformation in aqueous solutions was studied experimentally and partial reaction steps were modelled by means of quantum chemistry methods. While the rate of ketoprofen photolysis was not significantly affected by its acid-base equilibrium, a marked influence of pH on the subsequent degradation reactions was observed. At pH 1.3, two oxygenated primary products were identified, that underwent fast photolysis. Deprotonated form of ketoprofen was transformed preferentially to ethylbenzophenone and further degradation proceeded substantially slower. Oxygen participated on photolytic processes both as a reactant and the triplet state quencher. The active involvement of water molecules in the reaction mechanism was investigated by comparative experiments in acetonitrile. The phototransformation mechanism proposed based on the experimental data corresponded well with the theoretical results.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is associated with a broad spectrum of life-threatening adverse effects on the immature gastrointestinal tract. NSAID derivatives exploiting the beneficial effects of biologically active gases, such as hydrogen sulfide (H2S), have been developed. Herein, we determined the effects of ketoprofen and ATB-352, a H2S-releasing ketoprofen derivative, on selected metabolic pathways previously identified to be significantly altered by indomethacin in the human immature intestine. METHODS: Ketoprofen and ATB-352 were tested on human mid-gestation small intestinal explants maintained in a serum-free organ culture system for 48 hours. The expression levels of the representative genes involved in selected metabolic pathways were measured by real-time PCR after a treatment of 48 hours. RESULTS: Tested at a concentration that allows more than 80% inhibition of PGE2 production, ketoprofen was found to be less damaging than indomethacin at an equivalent dosage. However, based on the inducibility of cyclooxygenase-2 transcript expression, we were able to discriminate between responder individuals in which the deleterious effects observed with indomethacin were attenuated, and non-responder specimens in which the effects were similar to those observed with indomethacin. ATB-352 did not induce significant changes compared to ketoprofen on these metabolic pathways. CONCLUSIONS: These results show less damaging effects of ketoprofen compared to indomethacin on the immature intestine and indicate that the intestinal response to this NSAID significantly varies between individuals. However, the results did not allow us to demonstrate a specific beneficial effect of H2S release in organ culture.
In this paper, ketoprofen and ketoprofen lysinate were used as model drugs in order to investigate release profiles of poorly soluble and very soluble drug from sodium alginate beads manufactured by prilling. The effect of polymer concentration, viscosity, and drug/polymer ratio on bead micromeritics and drug release rate was studied. Ketoprofen and ketoprofen lysinate loaded alginate beads were obtained in a very narrow dimensional range when the Cross model was used to set prilling operative conditions. Size distribution of alginate beads in the hydrated state was strongly dependent on viscosity of drug/polymer solutions and frequency of the vibration. The release kinetics of the drugs showed that drug release rate was related with alginate concentration and solubility of the drug. Alginate solutions with concentration higher than 0.50% (w/w) were suitable to prepare ketoprofen gastro-resistant formulation, while for ketoprofen lysinate alginate, concentration should be increased to 1.50% (w/w) in order to retain the drug in gastric environment. Differential scanning calorimetry thermograms and Fourier transform infrared analyses of drug-loaded alginate beads indicated complex chemical interactions between carboxyl groups of the drug and polymer matrix in drug-loaded beads that contribute to the differences in release profile between ketoprofen and ketoprofen lysinate. Total release of the drugs in intestinal medium was dependent on the solubility of the drug and was achieved between 4 and 6 h.
BACKGROUND: Rapid maxillary expansion (RME) is an orthopaedic procedure indicated for a wide variety of clinical conditions. AIM: The aim of the study was to compare the effects of ketoprofen lysine salt (KLS) vs paracetamol/acetaminophen (P) on pain perception during RME. DESIGN: One hundred and fifty-one subjects (mean age 8.6 year) were enrolled in this prospective controlled clinical trial according to inclusion criteria: prepuberal stage of development, negative posterior transverse interarch discrepancy, non-concurrent use of other drugs. First phase: n.40 allocated to Group 1 used 40 mg of KLS, n.40 to Group 2 used 250 mg of P, n.36 to Group 3 as control group. Second phase: n.35 allocated to Group 4 used 40 mg ketoprofen lysine salt once a day for the first 3 days of activation. Pain experience was reported on a numeric rating scale (0-4) and a 100-mm visual analogue scale. Pain perception was tested with the Mann-Whitney test (P < 0.05). RESULTS: Pain perception was higher during the first 3 days of activation and it was described as mild to moderate. Group 1 experienced significantly less pain during the fourth, fifth, and sixth day (P < 0.05) compared with Group 2. Patients of the Group 4 reported significantly lower pain during the whole period of RME activation (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The perceived higher pain was reported during the second and third day of expansion. The analgesic effect of KLS is more effective than P during the fourth, fifth, and sixth day. The use of KLS during the first 3 days of activation seems to be able reducing pain during the whole active phase.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Administering various combinations of acetaminophen, ketoprofen, nefopam and ketamine, though sometimes discussed, is expected to provide superior pain relief and reduce opioid analgesic-related side effects. However, some studies have indicated that multimodal analgesia has limited efficacy. We studied the stability of various binary combinations of these four drugs. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The drugs were studied at 25 degrees C. Binary mixtures of acetaminophen, ketoprofen, nefopam and ketamine were produced. Each drug concentration was assessed using a specific high-performance liquid chromatographic technique. Measurements were carried out at T0, +1, +2, +4, +6 and +24 h. A 5% loss of initial concentration was considered to be significant. The changes with time of the concentrations were analysed using linear regression analysis. A P value of less than 0.05 was significant. RESULTS: The four drugs tested in the binary mixtures were stable, showing neither loss of concentration nor degradation products (P > or = 0.05). CONCLUSION: Physicochemical negative interaction is not likely to account for the limited clinical efficacy sometimes reported with binary combinations of these drugs. Coadministration of binary mixtures of acetaminophen, nefopam, ketoprofen and ketamine from the same bottle or infusion bag using the same venous line is demonstrated to be feasible.
