Recent research has suggested that ketorolac has an analgesic ceiling effect, meaning that despite increased dosages, the patient obtains no additional pain relief and is more likely to suffer adverse drug reactions. This article describes the outcomes of these studies and the recommendation to use the lowest possible dose for the shortest time when treating patients with acute pain.
BACKGROUND: Multidrug pain control can be beneficial in relieving pain and limiting narcotic use in renal colic. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of adding dexamethasone to ketorolac on pain control in acute renal colic. METHODS: One hundred twenty patients with renal colic were randomized into comparison and intervention groups to investigate the effect of 8 mg of dexamethasone with 30 mg ketorolac administered immediately after the patient's admission. The primary outcome was pain intensity based on the visual analog scale (VAS), which was assessed at the baseline and after 30 and 60 min of drugs treatment. Also, grade of vomiting and narcotic or antiemetic requirement were measured at the baseline and after the 60-min intervention. RESULTS: A total of 120 patients were included in the final analysis, with 60 patients (50%) randomized to the comparison group (just ketorolac) and 60 (50%) randomized to the intervention group (ketorolac + dexamethasone). There were no significant demographic differences between groups (P > 0.05 for all). Differences in VAS scores were significantly lower in the intervention group after 30 min of drug administration (P = 0.009, compared with the control). However, there was not a significant difference in the median VAS score between groups at the baseline and end of the study (P > 0.05). At the end of the study, the percent of patients who need to narcotics (35% vs. 58%, P = 0.01) and/or antiemetic (12% vs. 28%, P = 0.022) were significantly lower in the intervention group compared with the controls. CONCLUSIONS: In comparison with the patients who just received ketorolac, adding dexamethasone provided improved pain control after 30 min of therapy. Furthermore, it decreased opioid requirements and decreased an antiemetic need at the end of the study. Dexamethasone should be considered an important multimodal adjunct for controlling pain and nausea in renal colic.
BACKGROUND: While antibiotics remain our primary tools against microbial infection, increasing antibiotic resistance (inherent and acquired) is a major detriment to their efficacy. A practical approach to maintaining or reversing the efficacy of antibiotics is the use of other commonly used therapeutics, which show synergistic antibacterial action with antibiotics. Here, we investigated the extent of antibacterial synergy between the antibiotic gentamicin and the anti-inflammatory ketorolac regarding the dynamics of biofilm growth, the rate of acquired resistance, and the possible mechanism of synergy. METHODS: Control (ATCC 12600, ATCC 35984) and clinical strains (L1101, L1116) of Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis with varying antibiotic susceptibility profiles were used in this study to simulate implant-material associated low-risk and high-risk biofilms in vitro. The synergistic action of gentamicin sulfate (GS) and ketorolac tromethamine (KT), against planktonic staphylococcal strains were determined using the fractional inhibitory concentration measurement assay. Nascent (6 h) and established (24 h) biofilms were grown on 316L stainless steel plates and the synergistic biofilm eradication activity was determined and characterized using adherent bacteria count, minimum biofilm eradication concentration (MBEC) measurement for GS, visualization by live/dead imaging, scanning electron microscopy, gene expression of biofilm-associated genes, and bacterial membrane fluidity assessment. RESULTS: Gentamicin-ketorolac (GS-KT) combination demonstrated synergistic antibacterial action against planktonic Staphylococci. Control and clinical strains showed distinct biofilm growth dynamics and an increase in biofilm maturity was shown to confer further resistance to gentamicin for both 'low-risk' and 'high-risk' biofilms. The addition of ketorolac enhanced the antibiofilm activity of gentamicin against acquired resistance in staphylococcal biofilms. Mechanistic studies revealed that the synergistic action of gentamicin-ketorolac interferes with biofilm morphology and subverts bacterial stress response altering bacterial physiology, membrane dynamics, and biofilm properties. CONCLUSION: The results of this study have a significant impact on the local administration of antibiotics and other therapeutic agents commonly used in the prevention and treatment of orthopaedic infections. Further, these results warrant the study of synergy for the concurrent or sequential administration of non-antibiotic drugs for antimicrobial effect.
IMPORTANCE: The choice of anti-inflammatory prophylaxis parallel to cataract surgery is important for patient safety and successful outcome of surgery, but which regimen to choose is contested. OBJECTIVES: To determine whether a combination of prednisolone and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) eye drops was superior in preventing increased central macular thickness (central subfield thickness [CST]) after uncomplicated cataract surgery compared with NSAID monotherapy and sub-Tenon capsule depot (dropless surgery), and to test whether preoperative initiation of eye drop treatment was superior to initiation on the day of surgery. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This investigator-driven, single-center, randomized clinical trial with masked statistical analyses enrolled patients at the Department of Ophthalmology, Rigshospitalet Glostrup, Glostrup, Denmark, from February 1, 2018, to August 15, 2019. Follow-up was completed December 18, 2019. Participants included low-risk patients undergoing phacoemulsification for age-related cataract by an experienced surgeon (1 eye per participant). Data were analyzed from February 17 to June 15, 2020. INTERVENTIONS: Participants scheduled for cataract removal were randomized to 1 of 5 anti-inflammatory prophylactic regimens: eye drops with a combination of prednisolone, 1%, and ketorolac tromethamine, 0.5%, with or without preoperative initiation (preoperative prednisolone plus NSAID [control] and postoperative prednisolone plus NSAID groups), ketorolac monotherapy with or without preoperative initiation (preoperative and postoperative NSAID groups), or sub-Tenon depot of dexamethasone phosphate (sub-Tenon group). Eye drops were administered 3 times per day until 3 weeks postoperatively. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: CST 3 months postoperatively. RESULTS: A total of 470 participants (mean [SD] age, 72.2 [7.0] years; 290 women [61.7%]) with 94 participants in each group were included in the analysis. Three months after surgery, the mean CST was 250.7 (95% CI, 247.6-253.7) mum in the preoperative prednisolone plus NSAID group, 250.7 (95% CI, 247.8-253.7) mum in the postoperative prednisolone plus NSAID group, 251.3 (95% CI, 248.2-254.4) mum in the preoperative NSAID group, 249.2 (95% CI, 246.2-252.3) mum in the postoperative NSAID group, and 255.2 (95% CI, 252.0-258.3) mum in the sub-Tenon group. There were no significant differences in CST or visual acuity compared with control and no differences between preoperative and postoperative groups, but 47 of 83 participants (56.6%) in the sub-Tenon group needed additional anti-inflammatory treatment. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: No differences in CST or visual acuity were detected between the combination of prednisolone and NSAID eye drops vs NSAID monotherapy or sub-Tenon dexamethasone depot, although more than one-half of patients in the sub-Tenon arm received additional anti-inflammatory treatment. Initiating prophylaxis 3 days preoperatively was not superior to initiation on the day of surgery. Monotherapy with NSAIDs may be preferred in uncomplicated cataract surgery. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03383328.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of a multidrug injectate containing morphine, ropivacaine, epinephrine, and ketorolac, commonly referred to as the "Orthococktail," on cartilage tissue viability and metabolic responses using an established in vitro model. METHODS: With institutional review board approval and informed patient consent, tissues normally discarded after total knee arthroplasty (TKA) were recovered. Full-thickness cartilage explants (n = 72, Outerbridge grade 1 to 3) were created and bisected. Paired explant halves were treated with either 1 mL Orthococktail or 1 mL of saline and cultured for 8 hours at 37 degrees C, with 0.5 mL of the treatment being removed and replaced with tissue culture media every hour. Explants were cultured for 6 days, and media were changed and collected on days 3 and 6. After day 6, tissues were processed for cell viability, weighed, and processed for histologic grading. Outcome measures were compared for significant differences between treated and untreated samples. RESULTS: There were no significant differences in cartilage viability between control and Orthococktail-treated samples across a spectrum of cartilage pathologies. Orthococktail treatment consistently resulted in a significant decrease in the release of PGE2, MCP-1, MMP-7, and MMP-8 on day 3 of culture and PGE2, MMP-3, MMP-7, and MMP-8 on day 6 of culture, compared with saline controls. CONCLUSION: The results of the present study indicate that an Orthococktail injection composed of morphine, ropivacaine, epinephrine, and ketorolac is associated with a transient decrease in degradative and inflammatory mediators produced by more severely affected articular cartilage and may mitigate perioperative joint pain such that postoperative narcotic drug use could be reduced. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The Orthococktail solution used in this study may be a safe intraoperative, intra-articular injection option for patients undergoing joint arthroplasty and other joint preservation surgical procedures.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the study drug OMS302 (Omidria [phenylephrine and ketorolac injection 1.0%/0.3%]) compared with a balanced salt solution (vehicle), ketorolac, and phenylephrine on pupil diameter during cataract surgery and early postoperative ocular pain. SETTING: Twenty-three centers in the United States. DESIGN: Randomized clinical trial. METHODS: Patients were randomized (1:1:1:1) to receive vehicle, phenylephrine, ketorolac, or the study drug containing phenylephrine and ketorolac administered intracamerally during surgery. Intraoperative pupil diameter was determined each minute by video capture. Postoperative ocular pain was evaluated for up to 12 hours. RESULTS: The study evaluated 223 patients. The study drug was significantly better than the vehicle and ketorolac in maintaining mydriasis (least-squares mean differences 0.9 +/- 0.1 [SEM] and 0.7 +/- 0.1 for the study drug versus vehicle and ketorolac, respectively; P < .0001 each). Ocular pain assessed using the Visual Analog Scale was significantly reduced for the study drug compared with the vehicle or phenylephrine (least-squares mean difference -4.6 +/- 2.2 and P = .042 and 5.9 +/- 2.2 and P = .009, respectively). Significantly fewer patients treated with the study drug (3 [6.1%]) had an intraoperative pupil diameter smaller than 6.0 mm compared with those treated with the vehicle (25 [47.2%]; P < .0001), ketorolac (18 [34.6%]; P = .0004), or phenylephrine (11 [22.4%]; P = .0216). CONCLUSIONS: The study drug was safe and efficacious in maintaining mydriasis and reducing postoperative ocular pain. Both ketorolac and phenylephrine contributed to the therapeutic effects, with the combination showing superiority to either agent alone in maintaining an intraoperative pupil diameter of 6.0 mm or larger.
BACKGROUND: Multimodal pain management regimens and intraosseous infusion of morphine are two novel techniques that show promise in decreasing postoperative pain and opioid consumption following total knee arthroplasty. However, no study has analyzed the intraosseous infusion of a multimodal pain management regimen in this patient population. The purpose of our investigation was to examine the intraosseous administration of a multimodal pain regimen comprised of morphine and ketorolac during total knee arthroplasty with regard to immediate and 2-week postoperative pain, opioid pain medication intake, and nausea levels. METHODS: In this prospective cohort study with comparisons to a historical control group, 24 patients were prospectively enrolled to receive an intraosseous infusion of morphine and ketorolac dosed according to age-based protocols while undergoing total knee arthroplasty. Immediate and 2-week postoperative Visual Analog Score (VAS) pain scores, opioid pain medication intake, and nausea levels were recorded and compared against a historical control group that received an intraosseous infusion of morphine alone. RESULTS: During the first four postoperative hours, patients who received the multimodal intraosseous infusion experienced lower VAS pain scores and required less breakthrough intravenous pain medication than those patients in our historical control group. Following this immediate postoperative period, there were no additional differences between groups in terms of pain levels or opioid consumption, and there were no differences in nausea levels between groups at any time. CONCLUSIONS: Our multimodal intraosseous infusion of morphine and ketorolac dosed according to age-based protocols improved immediate postoperative pain levels and reduced opioid consumption in the immediate postoperative period for patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty.
Herpes simplex and herpes zoster are both viral infections caused by members of the herpesvirus family. The former is characterized by painful, fluid-filled blisters or sores on the skin and mucous membranes, while the latter presents as a painful rash with blisters, typically occurring in a single band or patch along one side of the body. The treatment remains a challenge since current antiviral therapy via oral administration may lead to unfavorable side effects such as headaches, nausea, and diarrhea. This study used electrospinning to develop biodegradable nanofibrous poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) membranes for delivery of both acyclovir and ketorolac. The structure of the spun nanofibers was assessed via scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and the appearance of loaded acyclovir and ketorolac in the nanofibers was confirmed with Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). Release profiles of these drugs from the nanofibrous membranes were assessed using in vitro elution studies, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) assays, and in vivo drug release patterns. The electrospun nanofibers had a size range of 283-725 nm in diameter, resembling the extracellular matrix of natural tissue and demonstrated excellent flexibility and extensibility. Notably, the drug-eluting nanofibers exhibited an extended release of high levels of acyclovir and ketorolac over a 21-day period. Thus, biodegradable drug-eluting membranes with a prolonged drug release could be a potential therapeutic approach for treating herpes infections.
