Hypertension is the most commonly encountered medical condition in pregnancy, contributing significantly to maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality. Mild to moderate hypertension in pregnancy is defined as systolic blood pressure of 140-159 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure of 90-109 mmHg (7-9% of pregnancies). When treating hypertension in pregnancy, not only do physiologic changes of pregnancy have an effect on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the drugs used, but the pathophysiology of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy also have an effect. To date, evidence is lacking on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of commonly used antihypertensive drugs, which often times leads to suboptimal treatment of hypertensive pregnant women. When considering which agents to use for treatment of mild to moderate hypertension, specifically in gestational and chronic hypertension, oral labetalol and nifedipine are valid options. An overview of the profile for use, safety, and current pharmacokinetic data for each agent is presented here.
As detailed information on the pharmacokinetics (PK) of labetalol in pregnant people are lacking, the aims of this study were: (1) to build a physiologically based PK (PBPK) model of labetalol in non-pregnant individuals that incorporates different CYP2C19 genotypes (specifically, *1/*1, *1/*2 or *3, *2/*2, and *17/*17); (2) to translate this model to the second and third trimester of pregnancy; and (3) to combine the model with a previously published direct pharmacodynamic (PD) model to predict the blood pressure lowering effect of labetalol in the third trimester. Clinical data for model evaluation was obtained from the scientific literature. In non-pregnant populations, the mean ratios of simulated versus observed peak concentration (C(max)), time to reach C(max) (T(max)), and exposure (area under the plasma concentration-time curve, AUC) were 0.94, 0.82, and 1.16, respectively. The pregnancy PBPK model captured the observed PK adequately, but clearance was slightly underestimated with mean ratios of simulated versus observed C(max), T(max), and AUC of 1.28, 1.30, and 1.39, respectively. The results suggested that pregnant people with CYP2C19 *2/*2 alleles have similar labetalol exposure and trough levels compared to non-pregnant controls, whereas those with other alleles were found to have increased exposure and trough concentrations. Importantly, the pregnancy PBPK/PD model predicted that, despite increased exposure in some genotypes, the blood pressure lowering effect was broadly comparable across all genotypes. In view of the large inter-individual variability and the potentially increasing blood pressure during pregnancy, patients may need to be closely monitored for achieving optimal therapeutic effects and avoiding adverse events.
BACKGROUND: Current guidelines for the management of asymptomatic hypertension (HTN) in the inpatient setting recommend the use of oral antihypertensives. However, in clinical practice, intravenous (IV) antihypertensives are commonly utilised with little supporting evidence. The objective of this study was to evaluate literature examining the safety/efficacy of IV hydralazine and labetalol in hospitalised patients with non-emergent, asymptomatic HTN. METHODS: The PRISMA guidelines were utilised to structure the systematic review. A search strategy composed of drug-, inpatient- and HTN-related terms was conducted utilising PubMed, Embase and Scopus databases through May 2020. Full-text, English-language articles describing IV labetalol and/or hydralazine use for non-emergent HTN in an inpatient setting that focused on clinical outcomes (ie vitals, adverse effects, healthcare utilisation) were included. Identified studies were screened/extracted using DistillerSR by two reviewers at each stage, and studies were evaluated qualitatively for the presence of bias. RESULTS: From 3362 records identified in the search, a final set of 10 articles were identified. Four studies focused on labetalol (40%), five studies on hydralazine and labetalol (50%), and one study on hydralazine (10%). The included studies presented a variety of outcomes, but several trends were identified, including reduction in average blood pressure in eight (80%) studies, a risk of adverse effects in six (60%) and increased length of stay in one (10%). DISCUSSION: The studies identified in this review raise concerns regarding the safety of IV hydralazine and labetalol in non-emergent HTN. Despite relatively broad clinical experience with these drugs, experimental investigations regarding their utility are recommended.
1 The interaction of phentolamine with the beta-adrenoreceptor-blocking drug, oxprenolol, was studied in a controlled trial. 2 The combination was generally well tolerated. 3 Oxprenolol alone produced modest but significant reductions in supine, standing and post-exercise blood pressures. Small reductions were observed only with sustained phentolamine administration. 4 The combined effect of the two drugs seemed to be addictive only at the lower level of oxyprenolol dosage. 5 Labetalol produced significantly greater reductions in supine and standing blood pressure than combined oxprenolol-phentolamine. At a daily dose of 400 mg, postural hypotension was not observed, although transient symptoms were frequent.
Background: Preeclampsia is a highly prevalent disease among pregnant women. In the event of hypertensive emergency, nifedipine, labetalol, and hydralazine are assigned as first-line therapies in preeclampsia. Further studies are needed to compare the effectiveness of these drugs to find the most cost-effective drug with minimal side effects. This study aimed to compare the effectiveness of these drugs in lowering blood pressure during hypertensive emergencies in severe preeclampsia. Methods: 60 pregnant women with severe preeclampsia were recruited in this multiple centre double-blind randomized clinical trial from May 2021 to April 2022 in Indonesia. The patients were divided equally into three groups and treated with three doses of nifedipine, labetalol, and hydralazine, respectively within one hour with 20 minutes interval. The effectiveness was measured based on systolic and diastolic blood pressures, and mean arterial pressure (MAP). The observation was carried out until five hours post-third dose administration. Results: The blood pressure was reduced significantly after the administration of the first to the third dose of each antihypertensive (p<0.05). A single dose administration, four, one, and three patients had 20% MAP reduction in nifedipine, labetalol, and hydralazine group. Three, seven, and one patient had a failure of reaching 20% MAP reduction even after receiving the third dose. The effectiveness of the drugs to achieve 20% reduction of MAP could be ranked as follows: nifedipine>labetalol>hydralazine (57.49%, 42.13%, and 40.87%, respectively) for single dose and hydralazine>nifedipine>labetalol (111.3%, 85.12%, and 90.04%, respectively) for triple dose. Conclusions: Nifedipine is the most effective drug to reduce the blood pressure when single dose administration is used, but requires more doses to further reduce the blood pressure. Hydralazine is the most effective when the drug administration is maxed up to three doses within 60 minutes with 20 minutes interval. Thai Clinical Trials Registry (TCTR): TCTR20221014007 (14/10/2022).
An improved high-performance liquid chromatographic (HPLC) assay has been developed for the analysis of labetalol in human plasma. The method is based on the combined use of an automated sample processor, reversed-phase analysis on a microparticulate polymer-based HPLC column and fluorescence detection. The pH stability of the polymeric column packing material allowed the use of a mobile phase adjusted to pH 9.5, which was optimal for the fluorescence of labetalol. Assay validation was undertaken over the labetalol concentration range 2-100 ng/ml. Calibration curves were essentially linear, and the mean coefficient of variation was 5.3%. The assay has been used for the analysis of clinical samples in support of pharmacokinetic studies.
BACKGROUND: Labetalol, a compound that blocks both alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors, is the only drug of its class currently available in the United States. OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology of labetalol and related compounds. SUMMARY: Unlike "pure" beta blockers, labetalol maintains cardiac output, reduces total peripheral resistance, and does not decrease peripheral blood flow. It has been used to treat hypertension of all degrees of severity and may be especially useful in black patients, elderly patients, patients with renal disease, and in pregnancy. It can be used in conditions that produce catecholamine crises, such as pheochromocytoma, clonidine withdrawal, and cocaine overdose. Its hemodynamic profile is attractive for use in myocardial ischemia. The parenteral form is useful in situations where blood pressure must be lowered quickly. The major side effect is orthostatic hypotension, and hepatotoxicity has been reported. CONCLUSIONS: Labetalol has several advantages over pure beta-blocking drugs and offers an alternative in managing hypertension that is difficult to control.
Twelve hypertensive patients received oral labetalol treatment (average final dose 1,200 mg/d) over a period of 16 months. 2 Satisfactory blood pressure control was maintained both at rest and after exercise. 3 Plasma renin activity was significantly reduced. 4 Postural hypotension measured in this group of patients after a single dose of labetalol 50 mg intravenously was considerably reduced during long-term oral treatment. 5 No serious side-effects were observed nor were there any significant changes in haematological and biochemical variables during the period. 6 Haemodynamic data obtained in two of the patients after 16 months' treatment suggests that the haemodynamic profile observed after acute intravenous administration is maintained after prolonged oral treatment.
Background and Objectives: The consumption of dietary supplements has increased over the last decades among pregnant women, becoming an efficient resource of micronutrients able to satisfy their nutritional needs during pregnancy. Furthermore, gestational drug administration might be necessary to treat several pregnancy complications such as hypertension. Folic acid (FA) and folate (FT) supplementation is highly recommended by clinicians during pregnancy, especially for preventing neural tube birth defects, while labetalol (LB) is a beta-blocker commonly administered as a safe option for the treatment of pregnancy-related hypertension. Currently, the possible toxicity resulting from the co-administration of FA/FT and LB has not been fully evaluated. In light of these considerations, the current study was aimed at investigating the possible in vitro cardio- and hepato-toxicity of LB-FA and LB-FT associations. Materials and Methods: Five different concentrations of LB, FA, FT, and their combination were used in myoblasts and hepatocytes in order to assess cell viability, cell morphology, and wound regeneration. Results: The results indicate no significant alterations in terms of cell viability and morphology in myoblasts (H9c2(2-1)) and hepatocytes (HepaRG) following a 72-h treatment, apart from a decrease in the percentage of viable H9c2(2-1) cells (~67%) treated with LB 150 nM-FT 50 nM. Additionally, LB (50 and 150 nM)-FA (0.2 nM) exerted an efficient wound regenerating potential in H9c2(2-1) myoblasts (wound healing rates were >80%, compared to the control at 66%), while LB-FT (at all tested concentrations) induced no significant impairment to their migration. Conclusions: Overall, our findings indicate that LB-FA and LB-FT combinations lack cytotoxicity in vitro. Moreover, beneficial effects were noticed on H9c2(2-1) cell viability and migration from LB-FA/FT administration, which should be further explored.
1 Patients with combined hypertension and angina pectoris may represent a therapeutic dilemma, with the angina being refractory to conventional beta-blockade. 2 The added benefit of peripheral vasodilation in control of blood pressure is documented in the case of nifedipine. 3 Improved blood pressure control by added nifedipine may not be accompanied by decreased severity of angina pectoris, emphasizing the complex causation of the angina in such patients. 4 The clinically proven added alpha-blocking activity of labetalol distinguishes labetalol from other beta-blockers. However, the suggested benefits of the added alpha-activity in patients with hypertension and angina remain to be proven by further trials in patients.
OBJECTIVE: to assess the maternal and fetal outcome in women with mild to moderate chronic hypertension on antihypertensive drug (methyldopa or labetalol) therapy compared to no medication. METHODS: This multicenter randomized clinical study was conducted at Menoufia University hospital, Shibin El-kom Teaching hospital at Menoufia governorate, Egypt.486 pregnant women with mild to moderate chronic hypertension were randomized into three groups; methyldopa group (n = 164), labetalol group (n = 160), and control or no medication group (n = 162) who were followed from the beginning of pregnancy till the end of puerperium to record maternal and fetal outcome. RESULTS: There was a highly significant difference between treatment groups (methyldopa and labetalol) and control group regarding the development of maternal severe hypertension, development of preeclampsia, renal impairment, presence of ECG changes, placental abruption, and repeated admission to hospital for blood pressure control (p < 0.001) with higher occurrence in the control (no treatment) group. Neonates in the labetalol group were more prone for the development of small for gestational age (SGA), neonatal hypotension, neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, and admission to NICU than their counterparts in the methyldopa and control groups (p < 0.001). The rate of prematurity was significantly higher in the control group than the treatment groups (p < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Treatment of mild to moderate chronic hypertension during pregnancy is beneficial in decreasing both maternal and fetal morbidity. The use of labetalol was associated with higher rates of SGA, neonatal hypotension, and neonatal hyperbilirubinemia compared to methyldopa or no medication.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy and safety of labetalol for hypertensive crisis in children </= 24 months of age. DESIGN: Retrospective chart review. Statistical analysis utilized analysis of variance for continuous data, chi-square tests for nominal data, and linear regression. SETTING: A 737-bed pediatric teaching institution. PATIENTS: Twenty-seven patients </= 24 months of age were treated with 37 intravenous infusions of labetalol, nicardipine, or nitroprusside for hypertensive crisis or hypertensive urgency. INTERVENTIONS: None. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The primary end point consisted of time to 20% reduction in systolic blood pressure. Primary safety end points measured the prevalence of deleterious effects of labetalol. Continuous infusion of labetalol reduced mean systolic blood pressure by at least 20% in < 8 hrs. This effect was similar to nicardipine and nitroprusside infusions. The reported side effects were similar in each group. Patients receiving labetalol and presenting with ischemic or traumatic brain injury were likely to develop hypotension requiring infusion discontinuation. CONCLUSIONS: Continuous intravenous labetalol infusion is efficacious for treatment of hypertensive crisis in children </= 24 months of age. Aside from patients presenting with ischemic or traumatic brain injury, labetalol was safe to use in this population for hypertensive emergencies and had a satisfactory adverse effect profile. Labetalol may reach dose saturation at a much lower dose in young children in comparison to adults. Clinicians should use caution when initiating labetalol infusions in young patients with brain injury.
A study of controlled hypotension was undertaken in 50 major surgical patients using labetalol, a drug with both alpha- and beta-adrenoceptor blocking activity. The patients were such that difficulty in achieving controlled hypotension could be anticipated: the young, the anxious and those for whom halothane was contraindicated. The administration of labetalol quickly induced hypotension which was controlled easily and was rapidly antagonized.
Since labetalol was first reviewed in the Journal (1978), its scope of therapeutic use has expanded and become better defined. Labetalol is an adrenoceptor blocking drug with combined alpha- and beta-blocking properties. These result in a more favourable haemodynamic profile for labetalol compared with 'pure' beta-blockers or pure alpha-blockers, but also contribute to a wider range, but not an overall increased incidence, of adverse effects. The drug is effective and well-tolerated in patients with all grades of hypertension, but is of particular value in special subgroups such as Black patients, the elderly and patients with renal hypertension. While comparative studies are not extensive, available data show that the drug reduces blood pressure to a similar extent, and in a similar proportion of patients, as 'pure' beta-blockers such as propranolol, pure alpha-blockers such as prazosin, calcium antagonists (nifedipine, verapamil), and centrally acting drugs (clonidine and methyldopa). Labetalol is very effective in hypertensive pregnant women and in hypertensive crises, where it provides good control of blood pressure without serious adverse effects, and where few therapeutic options exist. Few controlled studies have investigated the use of labetalol in deliberate induction of hypotension or prevention of hypertension during anaesthesia, and also in patients with ischaemic heart disease. However, available evidence suggests a role for labetalol in these indications and further studies should aid in clarification of its efficacy in these areas. Thus, with its broad scope of therapeutic use in hypertension labetalol remains an important therapeutic option, and the drug may well find an additional place in the treatment of myocardial ischaemia if further evidence confirms encouraging preliminary findings.
In a randomised, double-blind, cross over trial, 25 patients with mild to moderate primary hypertension were given nifedipine 20-40 mg twice daily and labetalol 200-400 mg twice daily after a 4 week period on placebo, followed by the two drugs in combination. The BP during placebo therapy was 164/108 mmHg supine and 159/110 mmHg standing. After monotherapy with nifedipine for 6 weeks the supine BP was reduced by 18/13 mmHg and the standing BP by 20/12 mmHg; with labetalol the corresponding figures were 26/15 mmHg and 28/21 mmHg, respectively. The combined therapy induced a larger fall in BP, by 36/22 mmHg supine and by 39/24 mmHg standing; in 21 of 23 patients the BP became normal. The heart rate (HR) decreased during labetalol treatment alone and on the combined therapy. With nifedipine alone, the HR was unchanged in the supine position and increased on standing. Nifedipine increased plasma renin activity (PRA) and urinary aldosterone excretion (uA), whereas labetalol reduced both. During combination therapy, PRA and uA remained unchanged. There was a slight fall in HDL-cholesterol during treatment with labetalol alone and in combination with nifedipine. The fasting blood glucose increased slightly during treatment with each of the drugs, but neither caused a change in the concentrations of glycosylated haemoglobin A1, serum insulin, C-peptide, or plasma glucagon. Adverse effects as a rule were well tolerated and were related to the pharmacological effects of the drugs. Only 2 patients left the trial, both during labetalol treatment.
Labetalol, a combined alpha-beta-adrenergic antagonist, is one of the new group of beta-adrenergic blockers reduces peripheral and coronary vascular resistances while preserving cardiac output. Unlike alpha-adrenergic blockers, labetalol tends to reduce heart rate during rest and exercise. The drug is a potent antihypertensive agent which has been used by mouth and by vein to treat mild, moderate, and severe hypertension, including hypertensive emergencies. Labetalol has a hemodynamic profile which makes it an attractive agent for treating myocardial ischemia. The drug reduces blood pressure, left ventricular wall tension, heart rate, and contractility while preserving or even augmenting coronary blood flow. Studies with labetalol in hypertensive patients with angina have shown it to be more effective than placebo in reducing angina attacks and blood pressure while improving exercise tolerance. The drug appears to have antianginal and antihypertensive effects comparable to atenolol and propranolol. Side effects of treatment are observed and most are related to alpha- and beta-adrenergic blockade. Labetalol also appears to be effective for treatment of normotensive patients with angina and for silent myocardial ischemia. It has no apparent effects on serum lipids and lipoproteins. Labetalol appears to be a useful drug for treating the hypertensive heart and its many complications.
Dilevalol and labetalol are examples of a growing number of new beta-blockers which combine nonselective beta-adrenoceptor antagonism with vasodilator activity. Dilevalol is one of the 4 stereoisomers of labetalol, and is estimated to form approximately 25% of the racemic drug. Labetalol itself is an alpha 1-antagonist but dilevalol, which has negligible affinity for alpha-receptors, exerts its vasodilator effect via beta 2-agonism. Both drugs are rapidly and completely absorbed in 60 to 90 min and subject to extensive first-pass hepatic metabolism; the average bioavailability after oral administration is around 20 to 35%, and there is wide interindividual variability in plasma drug concentrations and dosage requirements. The volume of distribution of dilevalol (17 to 25 L/kg) is higher than that reported for labetalol (3 to 16 L/kg), although both drugs are concentrated in the extravascular compartment. Correspondingly, the elimination half-life of dilevalol at steady-state is around 15h compared with 8h for labetalol. There is evidence that the pharmacokinetics of dilevalol change (a reduction in clearance) in translation from single-dose to long term therapy. There is no clinically significant effect of age on the steady-state disposition of either drug and the pharmacokinetics of labetalol appear to be unchanged during pregnancy. Although there is a linear relationship between dose and area under the concentration-time curve, early studies found no evidence of a simple relationship between dose or plasma drug concentration and the fall in blood pressure. However, an integrated pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic model has been used to correlate concentrations of both drugs with reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressure in individuals. This approach derives a mathematical description of antihypertensive response which integrates pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic information and also takes account of placebo effects and changes in drug concentration and blood pressure during the dosage interval. The pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships of labetalol are characterised by a linear model. For example, in a group of healthy volunteers, the 'responsiveness' to labetalol was -0.19mm Hg/micrograms/L. In contrast, the relationships of dilevalol are best described by a Langmuir maximum effect model, and so individual responses to short and long term treatment have been quantified by the concentration-effect parameters of maximum effect and drug concentration required to produce 50% of this.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
The effect of intravenously-administered labetalol (1 mg/kg) on uterine and fetal hemodynamics and fetal cardiac function was studied in 13 women with pregnancy-induced hypertension. Maternal mean blood pressure had decreased significantly by the end of the labetalol infusion and 30 min later. The pulsatility indices reflecting peripheral vascular resistance did not change in the main uterine, placental arcuate, umbilical, and fetal middle cerebral and renal arteries, nor did the parameters reflecting fetal cardiac function. A subgroup of seven patients with a more pronounced decrease in maternal blood pressure and three cases with original signs of fetal asphyxia did not react hemodynamically in a different manner from the group as a whole with respect to the circulatory effects of labetalol. These findings obtained by Doppler and colour Doppler methods in as comprehensive manner as possible seem to demonstrate a wide tolerance of maternal and fetal hemodynamics to the moderate decrease in maternal blood pressure achieved by labetalol infusion under short-term conditions in cases of pregnancy-induced hypertension.
