BACKGROUND: Acute hepatitis B infection is associated with severe liver disease and chronic sequelae in some cases. The purpose of this review was to determine the efficacy of nucleoside analogues (NA) (lamivudine versus entecavir) compared to placebo or no intervention for treating acute primary HBV infection. METHODS: A meta-analysis for drug intervention was performed, following a fixed-effect model. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-randomized studies that evaluated the outcomes of NA in acute hepatitis B infection were included. The following outcomes were considered: virological cure (PCR negative), elimination of acute infection (seroconversion of HBsAg), mortality, and serious adverse events. RESULTS: Five trials with 627 adult participants with severe acute hepatitis B defined by biochemical and serologic parameters were included. Virological cure did not favor any intervention: OR 0.96, 95% CI 0.54 to 1.7 (p = 0.90), I2 = 58%. Seroconversion of HBsAg to negative favored placebo/standard-of-care compared to lamivudine: OR 0.54, 95% CI 0.33 to 0.9 (p = 0.02), I2 = 31%. The only trial that compared entecavir and lamivudine favored entecavir over lamivudine (OR: 3.64, 95% CI 1.31-10.13; 90 participants). Adverse events were mild. CONCLUSION: There is insufficient evidence that NA obtain superior efficacy compared with placebo/standard-of-care in patients with acute viral hepatitis, based on low quality evidence.
We report a case of a 62-yr-old man with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related cirrhosis who developed hepatic decompensation after being started on lamivudine requiring liver transplantation. Decompensated liver disease while on lamivudine has been previously reported on two occasions, both HIV coinfected patients on a combination of nucleoside analogues. Our patient is alive and well nearly 2 yr after successful liver transplantation.
The preparation of (125) I-lamivudine ((125) I-3TC) and (125) I-lamivudine-ursodeoxycholic acid codrug ((125) I-3TC-UDCA), suitable for comparative biodistribution studies, is described. The synthesis of the unlabeled precursor 3TC-UDCA proceeds in an 11.6% yield, and the radiolabelling yields for (125) I-3TC and (125) I-3TC-UDCA were 89 and 92%, respectively. The final products are radiochemically pure (greater than 98%).
BACKGROUND: The use of dolutegravir/lamivudine is based on solid clinical trials; however, real-world data remain limited. OBJECTIVES: To provide data on the clinical use and effectiveness of dolutegravir/lamivudine in persons with HIV in a real-world scenario. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Retrospective, single-centre and observational study. We included all adults starting dolutegravir/lamivudine since November 2014. We reported all demographic, virological and immunological variables at baseline and assessed effectiveness [on treatment (OT), modified ITT (mITT) and ITT in those persons who reached 6 and 12 month follow-ups (M6 and M12). RESULTS: Of the 1058 persons, 9 were treatment-naive; the final analysis included 1049 treatment-experienced people with HIV. Median (IQR) follow-up was 1 (0.3-1.6) years, with 81% and 63% persons reaching M6 and M12, respectively. The longest use of dolutegravir/lamivudine was 7.4 years. Per OT, mITT and ITT, HIV-RNA < 50 copies/mL was 97%, 92% and 81% (M6) and 98%, 90% and 80% (M12), respectively. Females [adjusted risk ratio, aRR (95% CI): 1.69 (1.19-2.40)]; immediate, previous PI-based regimen [aRR (95% CI): 1.67 (1.09-2.56)]; and viral load (VL) >/= 50 copies/mL at dolutegravir/lamivudine initiation [aRR (95% CI): 3.36 (2.32-4.88)] were independently associated with lack of effectiveness at M12; other demographic, immunological and virological variables like previous M184V/I substitutions or virological failure, were unrelated. Of the total, 944 (90%) continued dolutegravir/lamivudine. The most frequent known reason for discontinuation was toxicity [48 (46%) cases]. CONCLUSIONS: In our real-world experience, virological suppression rates were high for treatment-experienced persons on dolutegravir/lamivudine; however, we identified subgroups with a higher risk of lack of effectiveness at M12, who may benefit from closer follow-ups.
OBJECTIVE: Compare the efficacy and safety of the 2-drug antiretroviral therapy regimen dolutegravir + lamivudine (DTG + 3TC) with traditional 3-drug regimens in treatment-naive patients with HIV-1. DESIGN: Data from double-blind, randomized controlled trials of at least 48 weeks' duration in treatment-naive patients with HIV-1 identified by systematic review were evaluated using a Bayesian network meta-analysis methodology. METHODS: The primary outcome was virologic suppression at Week 48 for 3-drug regimens versus DTG + 3TC (also analyzed in patient subgroup with baseline viral load >100 000 RNA copies/ml). Secondary outcomes included CD4 cell count change from baseline and safety (adverse events, serious adverse events, and drug-related adverse events) at Week 48. RESULTS: The network contains 14 unique regimens from 14 randomized controlled trials based on data from 10 043 patients. The proportional difference for viral suppression at 48 weeks for DTG + 3TC versus the other 13 regimens included in the network ranged from -2.7% (-11.0, 5.6%) versus DTG + tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine (FTC) to 7.3% (0.6, 13.8%) versus efavirenz + tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/FTC. DTG + 3TC was found to be significantly better than efavirenz + tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/FTC and similar to all other regimens analysed in terms of viral suppression at 48 weeks. With regard to other outcomes (CD4, adverse event, serious adverse event, drug-related adverse events) at 48 weeks, DTG+3TC was broadly similar to all regimens analysed. CONCLUSION: This network meta-analysis demonstrates similar efficacy and safety outcomes over 48 weeks with DTG + 3TC compared with traditional 3-drug antiretroviral therapy regimens.
Context The rate of co-infection of HIV/Tuberculosis is increasing alarmingly. This calls for a drug delivery approach targeting both diseases. Objective The study aims to investigate co-loading of isoniazid, an antitubercular drug and lamivudine an antiretroviral drug, into polymeric microspheres for simultaneous treatment of both diseases. Materials and methods Microspheres were prepared by o/o emulsion solvent evaporation method by employing ethylcellulose and eudragit RS 100 as polymers. The prepared formulation was suitably characterized for FTIR, DSC, percent yield, loose surface crystals, entrapment efficiency, and in vitro studies. The surface morphology of microspheres was observed using digital microscope and scanning electron microscope. Cell viability study was done on Caco-2 cells. Results and discussion FTIR and DSC studies demonstrated compatibility and stability of excipients. Microscopy studies revealed that particles were spherical in shape and distributed over a range of 120-270 mum. Percent yield, LSC and %EE have shown promising results. In vitro release showed biphasic release pattern with sustained release up to 12 h. Mechanism of drug release followed Higuchi Kinetics and non-fickian release behaviour. The formulation containing drug/polymer ratio 1:2 and EU/EC of 1:1 showed optimum response in context to achievement of controlled release. The cell viability studies showed that the prepared system had no toxic effect on intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cells. Conclusion Polymeric microspheres were prepared and suitably characterized for simultaneous delivery of two drugs. This matrix system could be used for better therapeutic outcome in this deadly co-infection.
BACKGROUND: We previously reported the effect of contraception on cervical tenofovir concentrations in Ugandan women with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Here we explored the role of cervicovaginal cytokines and drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters (DMETs) to elucidate female genital tract (FGT) drug disposition in a Ugandan cohort. METHODS: Cervicovaginal fluid and cervical biopsies were collected from Ugandan women with HIV receiving tenofovir/lamivudine-based therapy and intramuscular depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (n = 25), copper intrauterine device (cuIUD; n = 12), or condoms (n = 13) as contraception. Cytokines were measured in cervicovaginal fluid (CVF). Ectocervical tenofovir diphosphate (TFVdp), lamivudine triphosphate (3TCtp), and deoxyadenosine triphosphate (dATP)/deoxycytidine triphosphate (dCTP) concentrations and immune marker/DMET gene expression were measured in cervical biopsies. RESULTS: Cervical 3TCtp was not correlated with any CVF cytokines. Cervical TFVdp was correlated with IL-10, IL-7, and IL-17 in CVF. CCR5 mRNA expression in cervical biopsies was higher in cuIUD users versus condom users. Using multivariable linear regression, CVF IL-17, tissue dATP, plasma estradiol, and plasma tenofovir were all significant predictors of cervical TFVdp. Tissue dCTP and plasma lamivudine were significant predictors of cervical 3TCtp. CONCLUSIONS: TFVdp concentrations in cervix appear to be influenced by local inflammation. In contrast, 3TCtp FGT exposure was not affected by genital inflammation or DMETs. CuIUD users have more immune cells present, which may in turn influence local TFVdp disposition. MAIN FINDING: We investigated changes in tenofovir diphosphate and lamivudine triphosphate due to the microbiome and inflammation. While lamivudine triphosphate was not affected by either, tenofovir diphosphate appeared to be affected by local inflammation. Specifically, Th17 cells may influence tenofovir disposition.
OBJECTIVES: To develop a pragmatic twice daily lamivudine dosing strategy for preterm infants from 24 to 37 completed weeks of gestation. METHODS: Data were combined from eight pharmacokinetic studies in neonates and infants receiving lamivudine oral solution. A population pharmacokinetic model was developed using non-linear mixed effects regression. Different lamivudine dosing strategies, stratified by gestational age at birth (GA) bands, were simulated in a virtual population of preterm infants, aimed at maintaining lamivudine drug exposures (AUC0-12) within a reference target range of 2.95 to 13.25 microg.h/mL, prior to switching to WHO-weight band doses when >/=4 weeks of age and weighing >/=3 kg. RESULTS: A total of 154 infants (59% female) contributed 858 lamivudine plasma concentrations. Median (range) GA at birth was 38 (27-41) weeks. At the time of first pharmacokinetic sampling infants were older with median postnatal age (PNA) of 6.3 (0.52-26.6) weeks. Lamivudine concentrations were described by a one-compartment model, with CL/F and V/F allometrically scaled to weight. Maturation of CL/F was described using an Emax model based on PNA. CL/F was also adjusted on GA to allow extrapolation for extreme prematurity. Simulations predicted an optimal lamivudine dosing for infants GA >/=24 to <30 weeks of 2 mg/kg twice daily from birth until weighing 3 kg; and for GA >/=30 to <37 weeks, 2 mg/kg twice daily for the first 4 weeks of life, followed by 4 mg/kg twice daily until weighing 3 kg. CONCLUSIONS: Model-based predictions support twice daily pragmatic GA band dosing of lamivudine for preterm infants, but clinical validation is warranted.
We investigated the effect of combining the dolutegravir-specific R263K integrase resistance substitution with either M184I or M184V, two reverse transcriptase drug resistance substitutions that are frequently detected in individuals failing therapeutic regimens containing either lamivudine or emtricitabine. The presence of R263K and M184I/V in a single virus resulted in substantial further decreases in the viral replicative capacity compared to that in the presence of single substitutions alone.
We assessed the long-term safety, effectiveness and quality of a fixed-dose combination of nevirapine, stavudine and lamivudine (triomune). HIV-1-infected adults initially enrolled in a one-year, open-label, single-arm, multicentre trial in Cameroon were followed for 2 years. Our results support the safety and effectiveness of the triomune combination for first-line treatment of HIV infection. Virological effectiveness appeared to wane somewhat during the second year of treatment, however, and plasma nevirapine concentrations were relatively high.
We have investigated the effects of several beta-D-ddA 5'-monophospate (beta-D-ddAMP), and their corresponding beta-L-enantiomers prodrugs against HBV replication. All ddAMP prodrugs inhibited HBV replication in a dose-dependent manner.
INTRODUCTION: With longer life expectancy in people living with HIV (PLWH) on antiretroviral therapy, cardiovascular disease (CVD) has become a common cause of mortality among them. Abacavir has been associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction, but the mechanism is unknown. Additionally, abacavir may be obesogenic which could mediate an additional risk factor of CVD. We aim to investigate if discontinuation of abacavir will have a favourable impact on body weight and cardiac parameters in PLWH. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: Randomised, controlled, superiority trial of virologically suppressed PLWH on dolutegravir, abacavir and lamivudine (DTG/ABC/3TC) for >/=6 months. In total, 70 PLWH will be randomised 1:2 to either continue DTG/ABC/3TC or to switch to dolutegravir and lamivudine (DTG/3TC) providing the power of 80% at alpha 5% to detect a mean difference in weight change of 2 kg (Delta) given an SD of 2.7 kg. Follow-up will be 48 weeks. Data will be collected at baseline and week 48. Primary outcome will be change in mean body weight from baseline to week 24 and 48 evaluated in a linear mixed model. Secondary outcomes will be changes in cardiac, inflammatory and metabolic parameters, fat distribution, coagulation, endothelial, platelet function, quality of life and virological control from baseline to week 48. Measurements include CT of thorax and abdomen, external carotid artery ultrasound, liver elastography and dual energy X-ray absorptiometry and blood analysis. Plasma HIV RNA will be measured at baseline, week 4, 24 and 48. Forty participants (20 from each arm) will be included in a substudy involving cardiac MRI at baseline and week 48. Twenty non-HIV-infected controls will be included with a single scan to compare with baseline scan data. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Result from this study will lead to a better understanding of the association between antiretroviral therapy and the impact on weight and risk of CVD. Findings will be useful for both clinicians and PLWH in the guidance of a more individualised HIV treatment. Results from the main study and the substudies will be submitted for publication in a peer-reviewed journal(s). The AVERTAS study is approved by the Ethics Committee of the Capital Region, Denmark (H-20011433), Danish Medicines Agency (EudraCT no. 2019-004999-19) and Regional Data Protection Centre (P-2020-207). TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Pre-results registration at ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04904406, registered 27 May 2021. PROTOCOL VERSION: Protocol version 9.0, 4 April 2023, approved 10-05-2023 by Ethics Committee of the Capital Region, Denmark (H-20011433). Danish Medicines Agency (EudraCT no. 2019-004999-19). Regional Data Protection Centre (P-2020-207) ClinicalTrials.gov.
BACKGROUND: Clinical trials and real-life studies have granted the efficacy and safety of dolutegravir and lamivudine (DTG/3TC) in naive and experienced people living with HIV (PLWH), but there are no long-term data in elderly people. We herein describe our real-life cohort of PLWH who were >/=65 years of age (PLWH >/= 65) who started or were switched to DTG/3TC, single-tablet regimen, or DTG plus 3TC. METHODS: We considered laboratory/clinical parameter changes from the baseline to the last follow-up time point available for each person by the paired Wilcoxon test and analyzed factors associated with virological failure (VF) and discontinuation. RESULTS: We included 112 PLWH with a median age of 66 (IQR: 65-70) years, 77.6% males; 84.8% of people had multimorbidity, 34.8% were on polypharmacy, and only 5.4% were naive to treatment. Reasons to be switched to DTG/3TC were: abacavir removal (38.7%), treatment simplification (33.1%), and PI discontinuation (28.2%). The median treatment durability was 6 (IQR: 5.4-7) years. No significant changes were detected in metabolic, renal, immunological, or cardiovascular biomarkers during follow-up. HIV RNA undetectability was maintained in 104 (92.8%) individuals for whom follow-up evaluation was available. We observed eight discontinuations (two deaths, two VFs, two early intolerances, one significant weight gain, and one switch to long-acting therapy). No factors were significantly associated with VF or discontinuation. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study on DTG/3TC in PLWH >/= 65 with a follow-up longer than 5 years. DTG/3TC was found to be safe and effective, neutral on metabolic parameters, and with a low discontinuation rate for toxicity or VF.
Herein, two different sustainable and green signal processing spectrophotometric approaches, namely, derivative spectroscopy and wavelet transform, have been utilized for effective measurement of the antiretroviral therapy abacavir and lamivudine in their pharmaceutical formulations. These methods were used to enhance the spectral data and differentiate between the absorption bands of abacavir and lamivudine in order to accurately measure their concentrations. For determining abacavir and lamivudine, the first derivative spectrophotometric method has been applied to the zero-order and ratio spectra of both drugs. The same approach has been tested using the continuous wavelet transform method where a second order 2.4 of rbio and bior wavelet families were found to be optimum for measuring both drugs. Validation of the proposed methods affirmed their reliability in terms of linearity over the concentration range 1.5-30 microg/mL and 1.5-36 microg/mL for abacavir and lamivudine, respectively, precision (RSD < 2 %), and accuracy with mean recoveries ranging between 98 % and 102 %. Additionally, these spectrophotometric methodologies were applied to real pharmaceutical preparations and yielded results congruent with a prior chromatographic method. Most prominently, the proposed methods stood out for their greenness and sustainability with 97 points as evaluated by the analytical eco-scale method and a score value of 0.79 as analyzed by AGREE method, thereby making them suitable for resource-limited settings and highlighting the potential for broader application of green analytical methods in pharmaceutical analysis.
BACKGROUND: Pretreatment and acquired drug resistance mutations (DRMs) can limit antiretroviral therapy effectiveness. METHODS: We review prevalence of DRMs with resistance to nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), focusing on lamivudine and rilpivirine, from 127 articles with >100,000 individuals with HIV-1 infection. RESULTS: Estimated global prevalence of pretreatment resistance to any NRTI was 4% and to any NNRTI was 6%. Most prevalent DRMs resistant to lamivudine or rilpivirine were at positions E138 (4%), V179 (1%) and M184 (1%). Estimated acquired DRM prevalence was 58% for any NRTIs and 67% for any NNRTIs, most frequently at positions M184 (58%) and Y181 (21%). CONCLUSIONS: This review suggests low risk of lamivudine- or rilpivirine-resistant mutations in treatment-naive, HIV-1-infected individuals.
BACKGROUND: Dolutegravir (DTG) plus lamivudine (2-DR) is suggested as an initial and switch option in HIV-1 treatment. OBJECTIVE: To analyze the effectiveness, durability, and safety of 2-DR compared with DTG plus abacavir/lamivudine (3-DR). METHODS: This was an observational, ambispective study that included all treatment-naive (TN) and treatment-experienced (TE) patients who started 2-DR or 3-DR between July 1, 2018, and November 30, 2020. The primary end point was noninferiority, at 24 and 48 weeks, of 2-DR versus 3-DR regarding the percentage of patients with viral load (VL)>/=50 and 200 copies/mL in TN (4% margin) and VL<50 and 200 copies/mL in TE (margin 12%). Durability of response, and safety were also measured. RESULTS: 242 patients were included (53 TN and 189 TE). Two TN patients on 2-DR had VL>/=50 copies/mL and 1 had VL>/=200 copies/mL at week 24. In TE patients on 2-DR, 90.2% achieved VL<200 copies/mL at week 24 (difference: 3.8%; 95% CI = -6.3% to 14%) and 91.8% at week 48 (difference: 0.06%; 95% CI = -9% to 10%), meeting noninferiority criteria. Among the 53 TN patients, only 1 VF was observed in 2-DR. In TN patients, the risk of treatment discontinuation was similar between groups (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.37; P = 0.15); similar rates were also found in TE patients (HR = 0.94; P = 0.85). TE patients on 2-DR showed a better safety profile compared with 3-DR patients (P<0.001). CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: Our results did not show noninferiority in terms of virological effectiveness. Nevertheless, all effectiveness measures support the use of 2-DR in a real-life cohort of TN and TE. Additionally, durability and safety of 2-DR were confirmed to be similar to that of 3-DR.
An unknown impurity (degradation product) present at a level below 0.1% in the initial sample was increased to 0.25% in 50 degrees C 3 M stability samples of lamivudine, zidovudine and nevirapine tablets for oral suspension, as detected by gradient reverse phase HPLC. This degradation product was isolated using reverse phase preparative HPLC. Based on the spectral data, the structure of this degradation product is characterized as 1-[5-hydroxymethyl-4-(5-methyl-2,3-dihydro-[1,2,3]triazole-1-yl)-tetrahydrofuran-2-yl]-5-methyl-1 H-pyrimidine-2,4-(1H,3H)dione. Structural elucidation of this degradation product was carried out using MS, 1H NMR, 13C NMR, DEPT and IR spectral data. The formation of this impurity and its mechanism are discussed.
To assess the effects of prophylactic lamivudine on reactivation and mortality following immunosuppressive therapy in hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive patients, we performed a meta-analysis. Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized and nonrandomized prospective controlled trials and retrospective comparative case series were identified through The Cochrane Hepato-Biliary Group Controlled Trials Register, The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, EMBASE and LILACS. The primary outcomes were virological reactivation, clinical reactivation and mortality. Secondary outcomes included hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related mortality, liver histology, discontinuation or disruption of immunosuppressive therapy, lamivudine-resistant HBV strains and adverse events. A total of 21 studies were included, two of which were randomized controlled trials. Clinical and virological reactivation were significantly reduced in the lamivudine group [odds ratio (OR) 0.09; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.05-0.15 and OR 0.04; 95% CI 0.01-0.14 respectively]. All-cause mortality was significantly reduced in the lamivudine group (OR 0.36; 95% CI 0.23-0.56) which translates to only 11 patients who need to be treated to prevent one death. Lamivudine significantly reduced HBV-related mortality, and discontinuations or disruptions of the immunosuppressive treatment. No adverse effects of lamivudine were recorded, and resistance to lamivudine occurred in low rates. We demonstrated a clear benefit of lamivudine in terms of clinical and virological HBV reactivation, overall mortality, HBV-related mortality and interruptions or discontinuations in the immunosuppressive treatment. Lamivudine should be administered prophylactically to HBsAg-positive patients who are about to receive immunosuppressive therapy.
BACKGROUND: Concerns regarding potential toxicity and drug-drug interactions during long-term treatment with three-drug active antiretroviral therapy (ART) regimens have been attracting increasing attention. We aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of dolutegravir (DTG) plus lamivudine (3TC) in ART-naive adults in China. METHODS: This prospective observational cohort study enrolled HIV-naive inpatients treated with DTG + 3TC (2DR arm) or efavirenz (EFV) plus tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) and 3TC (3DR arm). There were no limits on baseline viral load. Inflammatory biomarkers were also investigated in the 2DR arm. RESULTS: Between September 2019 and January 2020, 27 patients treated with DTG + 3TC and 28 patients treated with EFV + TDF + 3TC were enrolled in the study. At week 12, the proportion of patients with viral loads < 50 copies/mL in the 2DR arm was 81.5% (22/27) compared with 53.6% (15/28) in the 3DR arm (p < 0.01). At week 24, the proportion of patients with viral loads < 50 copies/mL in the 2DR arm was 100% (26/26) compared with 83.3% (20/24) in the 3DR arm (p < 0.05). Mean changes in CD4 cell counts from baseline at week 12 were 125.46 cells/microL in the 2DR arm and 41.20 cells/microL in the 3DR arm (p < 0.05). Mean changes in CD4 cell counts from baseline at week 24 were 209.68 cells/microL in the 2DR arm and 73.28 cells/microL in the 3DR arm (p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: DTG + 3TC achieved virologic suppression more rapidly than EFV + TDF + 3TC after 12 and 24 weeks. DTG + 3TC could represent an optimal regimen for advanced patients. Clinical Trial Registration ChiCTR1900027640 (22/November/2019).
