It is challenging to balance the fetal risks associated with the use of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) against maternal and fetal risks of seizure worsening, and therefore it is very important to define and distinguish the possible risks entailed by different AEDs. This paper aims to undertake a comprehensive review regarding the possible risks of four classical (phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and valproate) and two newer (lamotrigine and levetiracetam) AEDs during pregnancy. The review focuses on major and organ-specific malformations, dose-dependent risks, mono vs polytherapy, and clinical pharmacokinetics. A discussion regarding the safety of AED use during breastfeeding is also provided.
BACKGROUND: Levetiracetam and zonisamide are licensed as monotherapy for patients with focal epilepsy, but there is uncertainty as to whether they should be recommended as first-line treatments because of insufficient evidence of clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness. We aimed to assess the long-term clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of levetiracetam and zonisamide compared with lamotrigine in people with newly diagnosed focal epilepsy. METHODS: This randomised, open-label, controlled trial compared levetiracetam and zonisamide with lamotrigine as first-line treatment for patients with newly diagnosed focal epilepsy. Adult and paediatric neurology services across the UK recruited participants aged 5 years or older (with no upper age limit) with two or more unprovoked focal seizures. Participants were randomly allocated (1:1:1) using a minimisation programme with a random element utilising factor to receive lamotrigine, levetiracetam, or zonisamide. Participants and investigators were not masked and were aware of treatment allocation. SANAD II was designed to assess non-inferiority of both levetiracetam and zonisamide to lamotrigine for the primary outcome of time to 12-month remission. Anti-seizure medications were taken orally and for participants aged 12 years or older the initial advised maintenance doses were lamotrigine 50 mg (morning) and 100 mg (evening), levetiracetam 500 mg twice per day, and zonisamide 100 mg twice per day. For children aged between 5 and 12 years the initial daily maintenance doses advised were lamotrigine 1.5 mg/kg twice per day, levetiracetam 20 mg/kg twice per day, and zonisamide 2.5 mg/kg twice per day. All participants were included in the intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis. The per-protocol (PP) analysis excluded participants with major protocol deviations and those who were subsequently diagnosed as not having epilepsy. Safety analysis included all participants who received one dose of any study drug. The non-inferiority limit was a hazard ratio (HR) of 1.329, which equates to an absolute difference of 10%. A HR greater than 1 indicated that an event was more likely on lamotrigine. The trial is registered with the ISRCTN registry, 30294119 (EudraCt number: 2012-001884-64). FINDINGS: 990 participants were recruited between May 2, 2013, and June 20, 2017, and followed up for a further 2 years. Patients were randomly assigned to receive lamotrigine (n=330), levetiracetam (n=332), or zonisamide (n=328). The ITT analysis included all participants and the PP analysis included 324 participants randomly assigned to lamotrigine, 320 participants randomly assigned to levetiracetam, and 315 participants randomly assigned to zonisamide. Levetiracetam did not meet the criteria for non-inferiority in the ITT analysis of time to 12-month remission versus lamotrigine (HR 1.18; 97.5% CI 0.95-1.47) but zonisamide did meet the criteria for non-inferiority in the ITT analysis versus lamotrigine (1.03; 0.83-1.28). The PP analysis showed that 12-month remission was superior with lamotrigine than both levetiracetam (HR 1.32 [97.5% CI 1.05 to 1.66]) and zonisamide (HR 1.37 [1.08-1.73]). There were 37 deaths during the trial. Adverse reactions were reported by 108 (33%) participants who started lamotrigine, 144 (44%) participants who started levetiracetam, and 146 (45%) participants who started zonisamide. Lamotrigine was superior in the cost-utility analysis, with a higher net health benefit of 1.403 QALYs (97.5% central range 1.319-1.458) compared with 1.222 (1.110-1.283) for levetiracetam and 1.232 (1.112, 1.307) for zonisamide at a cost-effectiveness threshold of  pound20 000 per QALY. Cost-effectiveness was based on differences between treatment groups in costs and QALYs. INTERPRETATION: These findings do not support the use of levetiracetam or zonisamide as first-line treatments for patients with focal epilepsy. Lamotrigine should remain a first-line treatment for patients with focal epilepsy and should be the standard treatment in future trials. FUNDING: National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment programme.
BACKGROUND: Levetiracetam (Keppra((R)), UCB Pharma Ltd, Slough, UK) and zonisamide (Zonegran((R)), Eisai Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) are licensed as monotherapy for focal epilepsy, and levetiracetam is increasingly used as a first-line treatment for generalised epilepsy, particularly for women of childbearing age. However, there is uncertainty as to whether or not they should be recommended as first-line treatments owing to a lack of evidence of clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness. OBJECTIVES: To compare the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of lamotrigine (Lamictal((R)), GlaxoSmithKline plc, Brentford, UK) (standard treatment) with levetiracetam and zonisamide (new treatments) for focal epilepsy, and to compare valproate (Epilim((R)), Sanofi SA, Paris, France) (standard treatment) with levetiracetam (new treatment) for generalised and unclassified epilepsy. DESIGN: Two pragmatic randomised unblinded non-inferiority trials run in parallel. SETTING: Outpatient services in NHS hospitals throughout the UK. PARTICIPANTS: Those aged >/= 5 years with two or more spontaneous seizures that require anti-seizure medication. INTERVENTIONS: Participants with focal epilepsy were randomised to receive lamotrigine, levetiracetam or zonisamide. Participants with generalised or unclassifiable epilepsy were randomised to receive valproate or levetiracetam. The randomisation method was minimisation using a web-based program. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was time to 12-month remission from seizures. For this outcome, and all other time-to-event outcomes, we report hazard ratios for the standard treatment compared with the new treatment. For the focal epilepsy trial, the non-inferiority limit (lamotrigine vs. new treatments) was 1.329. For the generalised and unclassified epilepsy trial, the non-inferiority limit (valproate vs. new treatments) was 1.314. Secondary outcomes included time to treatment failure, time to first seizure, time to 24-month remission, adverse reactions, quality of life and cost-effectiveness. RESULTS: Focal epilepsy. A total of 990 participants were recruited, of whom 330 were randomised to receive lamotrigine, 332 were randomised to receive levetiracetam and 328 were randomised to receive zonisamide. Levetiracetam did not meet the criteria for non-inferiority (hazard ratio 1.329) in the primary intention-to-treat analysis of time to 12-month remission (hazard ratio vs. lamotrigine 1.18, 97.5% confidence interval 0.95 to 1.47), but zonisamide did meet the criteria (hazard ratio vs. lamotrigine 1.03, 97.5% confidence interval 0.83 to 1.28). In the per-protocol analysis, lamotrigine was superior to both levetiracetam (hazard ratio 1.32, 95% confidence interval 1.05 to 1.66) and zonisamide (hazard ratio 1.37, 95% confidence interval 1.08 to 1.73). For time to treatment failure, lamotrigine was superior to levetiracetam (hazard ratio 0.60, 95% confidence interval 0.46 to 0.77) and zonisamide (hazard ratio 0.46, 95% confidence interval 0.36 to 0.60). Adverse reactions were reported by 33% of participants starting lamotrigine, 44% starting levetiracetam and 45% starting zonisamide. In the economic analysis, both levetiracetam and zonisamide were more costly and less effective than lamotrigine and were therefore dominated. Generalised and unclassifiable epilepsy. Of 520 patients recruited, 260 were randomised to receive valproate and 260 were randomised to receive to levetiracetam. A total of 397 patients had generalised epilepsy and 123 had unclassified epilepsy. Levetiracetam did not meet the criteria for non-inferiority in the primary intention-to-treat analysis of time to 12-month remission (hazard ratio 1.19, 95% confidence interval 0.96 to 1.47; non-inferiority margin 1.314). In the per-protocol analysis of time to 12-month remission, valproate was superior to levetiracetam (hazard ratio 1.68, 95% confidence interval 1.30 to 2.15). Valproate was superior to levetiracetam for time to treatment failure (hazard ratio 0.65, 95% confidence interval 0.50 to 0.83). Adverse reactions were reported by 37.4% of participants receiving valproate and 41.5% of those receiving levetiracetam. Levetiracetam was both more costly (incremental cost of  pound104, 95% central range - pound587 to  pound1234) and less effective (incremental quality-adjusted life-year of -0.035, 95% central range -0.137 to 0.032) than valproate, and was therefore dominated. At a cost-effectiveness threshold of  pound20,000 per quality-adjusted life-year, levetiracetam was associated with a probability of 0.17 of being cost-effective. LIMITATIONS: The SANAD II trial was unblinded, which could have biased results by influencing decisions about dosing, treatment failure and the attribution of adverse reactions. FUTURE WORK: SANAD II data could now be included in an individual participant meta-analysis of similar trials, and future similar trials are required to assess the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of other new treatments, including lacosamide and perampanel. CONCLUSIONS: Focal epilepsy - The SANAD II findings do not support the use of levetiracetam or zonisamide as first-line treatments in focal epilepsy. Generalised and unclassifiable epilepsy - The SANAD II findings do not support the use of levetiracetam as a first-line treatment for newly diagnosed generalised epilepsy. For women of childbearing potential, these results inform discussions about the benefit (lower teratogenicity) and harm (worse seizure outcomes and higher treatment failure rate) of levetiracetam compared with valproate. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN30294119 and EudraCT 2012-001884-64. FUNDING: This project was funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment programme and will be published in full in Health Technology Assessment; Vol. 25, No. 75. See the NIHR Journals Library website for further project information.
BACKGROUND: Maternal use of valproate during pregnancy has been associated with an increased risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in children. Although most studies of other antiseizure medications have not shown increased risks of these disorders, there are limited and conflicting data regarding the risk of autism spectrum disorder associated with maternal topiramate use. METHODS: We identified a population-based cohort of pregnant women and their children within two health care utilization databases in the United States, with data from 2000 through 2020. Exposure to specific antiseizure medications was defined on the basis of prescription fills from gestational week 19 until delivery. Children who had been exposed to topiramate during the second half of pregnancy were compared with those unexposed to any antiseizure medication during pregnancy with respect to the risk of autism spectrum disorder. Valproate was used as a positive control, and lamotrigine was used as a negative control. RESULTS: The estimated cumulative incidence of autism spectrum disorder at 8 years of age was 1.9% for the full population of children who had not been exposed to antiseizure medication (4,199,796 children). With restriction to children born to mothers with epilepsy, the incidence was 4.2% with no exposure to antiseizure medication (8815 children), 6.2% with exposure to topiramate (1030 children), 10.5% with exposure to valproate (800 children), and 4.1% with exposure to lamotrigine (4205 children). Propensity score-adjusted hazard ratios in a comparison with no exposure to antiseizure medication were 0.96 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.56 to 1.65) for exposure to topiramate, 2.67 (95% CI, 1.69 to 4.20) for exposure to valproate, and 1.00 (95% CI, 0.69 to 1.46) for exposure to lamotrigine. CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of autism spectrum disorder was higher among children prenatally exposed to the studied antiseizure medications than in the general population. However, after adjustment for indication and other confounders, the association was substantially attenuated for topiramate and lamotrigine, whereas an increased risk remained for valproate. (Funded by the National Institute of Mental Health.).
OBJECTIVE: To pursue explanations for compromised efficacy and induction of side-effects in some generic brands of lamotrigine distributed in Australia. METHOD: Bioassays of the non-generic and five generic lamotrigine tablets were undertaken (also after exposure to heat and cold), as well as assays of two generic drugs generating concerning side-effects in two patients, while enquiries were made of manufacturing companies. RESULTS: Mass spectrometry of the six tested products showed comparable properties and no compromising when those tablets were heated and cooled, while analyses of the products taken by the two patients reporting significant side-effects showed an increase in the peak area lamotrigine concentration. CONCLUSIONS: We failed to identify any intrinsically compromised product in our comparison analyses of the six preparations. We consider alternate explanations for an issue leading to widespread international reporting of distinct side-effects and deaths following brand switching, with analyses of the two problematic preparations supporting a 'faulty' batch explanation.
The aim of the current study was to investigate the seizure outcome and also factors associated with that in patients with epilepsy [i.e., idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGEs), symptomatic generalized epilepsies (SGEs), and focal epilepsies], who received either lamotrigine (LTG) or levetiracetam (LEV). This was a retrospective longitudinal study. All patients with a diagnosis of IGE, focal epilepsy, or SGE, who received either LTG or LEV, were recruited at the outpatient epilepsy clinic at Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran from 2008 until 2020. All patients had to be followed at our center for at least 14 months. Two hundred and thirty-six patients were studied (101 IGE, 98 focal epilepsy, and 37 SGE). At the first visit, LTG was prescribed for 159 patients; 40 people (25.2%) became seizure-free, and LEV was prescribed for 77 people; 23 persons (29.9%) became seizure-free (p = 0.438). Patients who were not taking any drug at the time of their first visit, or were receiving fewer drugs, and those who had received fewer drugs in their drug history were more likely to enjoy a seizure-free state at the follow-up. Among the patients, who received LTG at the first visit, taking any Na-channel blocking drug (e.g., carbamazepine) in the drug history was associated with a poor seizure outcome; this was not the case for LEV. Implementation of appropriate personalized treatment plans in patients with epilepsy is of paramount significance. Rational selection of appropriate drug(s) is the mainstay of this process.
BACKGROUND: This is an updated version of the Cochrane Review previously published in 2019. Absence seizures (AS) are brief epileptic seizures which present in childhood and adolescence. Depending on clinical features and electroencephalogram (EEG) findings they are divided into typical, atypical absences, and absences with special features. Typical absences are characterised by sudden loss of awareness and an EEG typically shows generalised spike wave discharges at three cycles per second. Ethosuximide, valproate and lamotrigine are currently used to treat absence seizures. This review aims to determine the best choice of antiepileptic drug for children and adolescents with AS. OBJECTIVES: To review the evidence for the effects of ethosuximide, valproate and lamotrigine as treatments for children and adolescents with absence seizures (AS), when compared with placebo or each other. SEARCH METHODS: For the latest update we searched the Cochrane Register of Studies (CRS Web, 22 September 2020) and MEDLINE (Ovid, 1946 to September 21, 2020). CRS Web includes randomised or quasi-randomised, controlled trials from PubMed, Embase, ClinicalTrials.gov, the World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), and the Specialized Registers of Cochrane Review Groups including Epilepsy. No language restrictions were imposed. In addition, we contacted Sanofi Winthrop, Glaxo Wellcome (now GlaxoSmithKline) and Parke Davis (now Pfizer), manufacturers of sodium valproate, lamotrigine and ethosuximide respectively. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised parallel group monotherapy or add-on trials which include a comparison of any of the following in children or adolescents with AS: ethosuximide, sodium valproate, lamotrigine, or placebo. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Outcome measures were: 1. proportion of individuals seizure free at one, three, six, 12 and 18 months post randomisation; 2. individuals with a 50% or greater reduction in seizure frequency; 3. normalisation of EEG and/or negative hyperventilation test; and 4. adverse effects. Data were independently extracted by two review authors. Results are presented as risk ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs). We used GRADE quality assessment criteria to evaluate the certainty of evidence for the outcomes derived from all included studies. MAIN RESULTS: On the basis of our selection criteria, we included no new studies in the present review. Eight small trials (total number of participants: 691) were included from the earlier review. Six of them were of poor methodological quality (unclear or high risk of bias) and seven recruited less than 50 participants. There are no placebo-controlled trials for ethosuximide or valproate, and hence, no evidence from randomised controlled trials (RCTs) to support a specific effect on AS for either of these two drugs. Due to the differing methodologies used in the trials comparing ethosuximide, lamotrigine and valproate, we thought it inappropriate to undertake a meta-analysis. One large randomised, parallel double-blind controlled trial comparing ethosuximide, lamotrigine and sodium valproate in 453 children with newly diagnosed childhood absence epilepsy found that at 12 months, seizure freedom was higher in patients taking ethosuximide (70/154, 45%) than in patients taking lamotrigine (31/146, 21%; P < 0.001), with no difference between valproate (64/146, 44%) and ethosuximide (70/154, 45%; P > 0.05). In this study, the frequency of treatment failures due to intolerable adverse events was significantly different among the treatment groups, with the largest proportion of adverse events in the valproic acid group (48/146, 33%) compared to the ethosuximide (38/154, 25%) and the lamotrigine (29/146, 20%) groups (P < 0.037). Overall, this large study demonstrates the superior effectiveness of ethosuximide and valproic acid compared to lamotrigine as initial monotherapy aimed to control seizures without intolerable adverse effects in children with childhood absence epilepsy. This study provided high certainty of the evidence for outcomes for which data were available. However, the certainty of the evidence provided by the other included studies was low, primarily due to risk of bias and imprecise results because of the small sample sizes. Hence, conclusions regarding the efficacy of ethosuximide, valproic acid and lamotrigine derive mostly from this single study. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Since the last version of this review was published, we have found no new studies. Hence, the conclusions remain the same as the previous update. With regards to both efficacy and tolerability, ethosuximide represents the optimal initial empirical monotherapy for children and adolescents with AS. However, if absence and generalised tonic-clonic seizures coexist, valproate should be preferred, as ethosuximide is probably inefficacious on tonic-clonic seizures.
BACKGROUND: This is an updated version of the Cochrane Review previously published in 2017.Absence seizures (AS) are brief epileptic seizures which present in childhood and adolescence. Depending on clinical features and electroencephalogram (EEG) findings they are divided into typical, atypical absences, and absences with special features. Typical absences are characterised by sudden loss of awareness and an EEG typically shows generalised spike wave discharges at three cycles per second. Ethosuximide, valproate and lamotrigine are currently used to treat absence seizures. This review aims to determine the best choice of antiepileptic drug for children and adolescents with AS. OBJECTIVES: To review the evidence for the effects of ethosuximide, valproate and lamotrigine as treatments for children and adolescents with absence seizures (AS), when compared with placebo or each other. SEARCH METHODS: For the latest update we searched the Cochrane Register of Studies (CRS Web, 29 May 2018), which includes the Cochrane Epilepsy Group's Specialized Register and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE (Ovid, 1946 to 29 May 2018), ClinicalTrials.gov (29 May 2018) and the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP, 29 May 2018). Previously we searched Embase (1988 to March 2005) and SCOPUS (1823 to 31 March 2014), but this is no longer necessary because randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-RCTs in Embase and SCOPUS are now included in CENTRAL. No language restrictions were imposed. In addition, we contacted Sanofi Winthrop, Glaxo Wellcome (now GlaxoSmithKline) and Parke Davis (now Pfizer), manufacturers of sodium valproate, lamotrigine and ethosuximide respectively. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised parallel group monotherapy or add-on trials which include a comparison of any of the following in children or adolescents with AS: ethosuximide, sodium valproate, lamotrigine, or placebo. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Outcome measures were: (1) proportion of individuals seizure free at one, three, six, 12 and 18 months post randomisation; (2) people with a 50% or greater reduction in seizure frequency; (3) normalisation of EEG and/or negative hyperventilation test; and (4) adverse effects. Data were independently extracted by two review authors. Results are presented as risk ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs). We used GRADE quality assessment criteria to evaluate the certainty of evidence derived from all included studies. MAIN RESULTS: On the basis of our selection criteria, we included no new studies in the present review. Eight small trials (total number of participants: 691) were included from the earlier review. Six of them were of poor methodological quality (unclear or high risk of bias) and seven recruited less than 50 participants. There are no placebo-controlled trials for ethosuximide or valproate, and hence, no evidence from RCTs to support a specific effect on AS for either of these two drugs. Due to the differing methodologies used in the trials comparing ethosuximide, lamotrigine and valproate, we thought it inappropriate to undertake a meta-analysis. One large randomised, parallel double-blind controlled trial comparing ethosuximide, lamotrigine and sodium valproate in 453 children with newly diagnosed childhood absence epilepsy found that at 12 months, the freedom-from-failure rates for ethosuximide and valproic acid were similar and were higher than the rate for lamotrigine. The frequency of treatment failures due to lack of seizure control (P < 0.001) and intolerable adverse events (P < 0.037) was significantly different among the treatment groups, with the largest proportion of lack of seizure control in the lamotrigine cohort, and the largest proportion of adverse events in the valproic acid group. Overall, this large study demonstrates the superior effectiveness of ethosuximide and valproic acid compared to lamotrigine as initial monotherapy aimed to control seizures without intolerable adverse effects in children with childhood absence epilepsy. The risk of bias for this study was low. We rated the overall certainty of the evidence available from the included studies to be moderate or high. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Since the last version of this review was published, we have found no new studies. Hence, the conclusions remain the same as the previous update. With regards to both efficacy and tolerability, ethosuximide represents the optimal initial empirical monotherapy for children and adolescents with AS. However, if absence and generalised tonic-clonic seizures coexist, valproate should be preferred, as ethosuximide is probably inefficacious on tonic-clonic seizures.
BACKGROUND: Patients with Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) have a high prevalence of mood disorders. Lamotrigine (LAM) is often used as an off-label therapeutic option for BPD. We aimed to conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the efficacy and tolerability of LAM for the treatment of BPD. METHODS: We comprehensively searched electronic databases for eligible studies from the inception of databases to September 2019. Outcomes investigated were BPD dimensions, tolerability, and adverse events. Quality assessments were completed for the included studies. Data were summarized using random-effects model. RESULTS: Of the 619 records, five studies, including three randomized controlled trials (RCT; N = 330) were included for the qualitative analysis. A meta-analysis conducted on two RCTs measuring LAM efficacy at 12 weeks, showed no statistically significant difference at 12 weeks (SMD: -0.04; 95% CI: -0.49, 0.41; p = 0.87; I(2) = 38%) and at study endpoints (SMD: 0.18, 95%CI: -0.89, 1.26; p = 0.74; I(2) = 86%) as compared to placebo. Sensitivity analysis on three RCTs measuring impulsivity/aggression showed no statistically significant difference between LAM and placebo (SMD: -1.84, 95% CI: -3.94, 0.23; p = 0.08; I(2) = 95%). LAM was well tolerated, and quality assessment of the included trials was good. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest there is limited data regarding efficacy of lamotrigine in BPD. There was no consistent evidence of lamotrigine's efficacy for the core symptom domains of BPD. Future studies should focus on examining targeted domains of BPD to clarify sub-phenotypes and individualized treatment for patients with BPD.
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (SJS) is a rare life-threatening condition characterized by severe mucocutaneous epidermal necrolysis and detachment of the epidermis. The condition centers around a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction with a complex etiology stemming from a variety of causes. The number one cause is medication-related-common ones including sulfonamides, antiepileptics, allopurinol, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Genetics also play a role as several human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genotypes within certain ethnic groups have been implicated in adverse reactions to specific drugs. HLAB*15:02 has been identified in the Chinese and others of Southeast Asian origin to increase susceptibility to lamotrigine and carbamazepine-induced SJS. Furthermore, patients of Japanese origin with HLAB*31:01 and Koreans with HLA-B*44:03 are also at increased risk of SJS after receiving the same two drugs. Of the antiepileptics, one most commonly associated with SJS is lamotrigine, a pre-synaptic voltage-gated sodium channel inhibitor. Lamotrigine is an antiepileptic drug of the phenyltriazine class that is indicated for the prevention of focal and generalized seizures in epileptic patients as well as monotherapy or adjunctive maintenance treatment for Bipolar disorder. The occurrence of SJS is not a rigid contraindication to lamotrigine reintroduction in the same patient. To facilitate this, manufacturers have developed a strict re-challenge dosing regimen to facilitate successful reintroduction of lamotrigine. In order to prevent the recurrence of SJS during a re-challenge, timing of re-dose and initial rash severity must be considered. Therefore, to prevent SJS recurrence, prime lamotrigine re-challenge patients are those with mild initial rash that has not occurred within the previous 4 weeks. The Federal Food and Drug Administration recommends the testing HLA subtypes for those associated with SJS prior to starting lamotrigine.
BACKGROUND: The Collaborative Care Model of psychiatric consultation in primary care has improved outcomes for unipolar depression, but bipolar depressions are challenging for providers and consultants. Although lamotrigine and lithium are both first line medications for bipolar depression, their use in primary care has been declining over the last decade. OBJECTIVE: Our project aimed to quantify the frequency of and adoption of recommendations for lamotrigine and lithium, and their adverse effects, in a Collaborative Care program. METHODS: Chart review. RESULTS: For 620 depressed adult patients (Public Health Questionnaire, 9-item >/=10), lamotrigine and lithium were recommended by psychiatric consultant for 35% and 26% of patients, respectively; and when recommended, were prescribed by primary care providers 50% and 32% of the time, respectively. Eighty-four percent of lithium dosages were 600 mg or less; average serum level 0.32 mEq/l. In follow-up up to 6 months, lithium was associated with no more weight gain than lamotrigine; but 12% of patients receiving lithium had thyroid stimulating hormone increases exceeding the upper limit of normal, occurring in an average of 32 days after the initial prescription. CONCLUSIONS: (i) In a Collaborative Care program of psychiatric consultation, recommendations for lamotrigine and lithium were very frequent. (ii) Adoption of these recommendations is variable, warranting further investigation. (iii) Like higher doses, low doses of lithium induced hypothyroidism (rapidly)-but not weight gain.
OBJECTIVE: This review aims to summarize existing evidence on the adverse pregnancy outcomes and seizure control effects of using lamotrigine (LTG) monotherapy in pregnancy women with epilepsy (WWE) during pregnancy. METHODS: A comprehensive search was conducted in various databases including Cochrane, Web of Science, CBM, PubMed, Embase, CNKI, and Pregnancy Registration Center databases to identify relevant studies. The search was concluded up to January 2024. Studies comparing LTG with other antiseizure medications (ASMs) for treating epilepsy in pregnant women were included, with no language or regional restrictions. RESULTS: A total of 19 studies were included for analysis, with 16 studies reporting adverse pregnancy outcomes and 6 studies reporting seizure control outcomes. Meta-analysis showed that compared to monotherapy with carbamazepine (CBZ), sodium valproate (VPA), and levetiracetam (LEV), LTG monotherapy had a slightly weaker ability to control seizures during pregnancy, with ORs and 95 %CIs of 0.65 (0.57-0.75; CBZ), 0.50 (0.32-0.79; VPA), and 0.55 (0.36-0.84; LEV). Regarding adverse pregnancy outcomes, the occurrence rate of LTG monotherapy was significantly lower than that of CBZ, VPA, phenytoin (PHT), and phenobarbital (PHB), with ORs and 95 %CIs ranging from 0.30 (0.25-0.35; VPA) to 0.68 (0.56-0.81; CBZ). CONCLUSION: Based on meta-analysis, LTG and LEV appear to be preferred medications for controlling seizures during pregnancy. This review provides further support for the use of LTG monotherapy in pregnant WWE, building upon existing evidence for clinical practitioners.
PURPOSE: Prenatal exposure to antiseizure medications (ASMs) has been associated with an increased risk of major malformations and neurodevelopmental disorders, with the latter being mainly associated with valproate (VPA). Our aim was to compare neurocognitive outcome at age 6-7 years in children exposed prenatally to lamotrigine (LTG), carbamazepine (CBZ), valproate (VPA) or levetiracetam (LEV) monotherapy. METHODS: Eligible mother-child pairs were identified from the observational prospective multinational EURAP cohort study. Assessor-blinded testing was conducted at age 6-7 years using WISC-III and NEPSY-II. Verbal IQ (VIQ), performance IQ (PIQ), full scale IQ (FSIQ) and performance in neuropsychological tasks were compared across ASM groups by ANOVA. Scores were adjusted for maternal IQ, paternal education, maternal epilepsy type and child sex. RESULTS: Of 169 children enrolled in the study, 162 (LTG n = 80, CBZ n = 37, VPA n = 27, LEV n = 18) had sufficient data from WISC-III, NEPSY-II or both, and were included in the analyses. Observed (unadjusted) PIQ and FSIQ did not differ across exposure groups, but a difference was identified for VIQ (P<0.05), with children exposed to VPA having lower scores than children exposed to LEV (P<0.05) and children from all groups combined (P<0.01). Adjusted VIQ, PIQ and FSIQ scores did not differ significantly across groups, but VPA-exposed children had borderline significantly lower adjusted VIQ scores than children from all groups combined (P=0.051). VPA-exposed children had lower scores in comprehension of instructions before and after adjustment for confounding variables than children exposed to LTG (P<0.001), LEV (P<0.01) or children from all groups combined (p < 0.001). The VPA-exposed group also had lower scores in immediate and delayed memory for faces compared to children exposed to CBZ (P<0.05 and P<0.001, respectively) and LTG (P<0.05 and P<0.02, respectively), and children from all groups combined (P<0.02 and P<0.001, respectively). LEV-exposed children had lower scores in delayed memory for names than children exposed to LTG (P<0.001), CBZ (P<0.001), VPA (P<0.05) and children from all groups combined (P<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with previous reports, our results provide evidence for an adverse effect of prenatal exposure to valproate on verbal development. Our finding of relatively weaker performance of VPA-exposed children compared to other ASM exposures in both comprehension of instructions and face memory also suggest that children of mothers treated with VPA are at increased risk for compromised memory functions or altered processing of socially relevant information.
CONTEXT: Lamotrigine is a broad-spectrum anticonvulsant commonly used to treat seizure and bipolar mood disorders. Evidence from case series and retrospective studies indicate that lamotrigine overdose is usually benign. However, there are reported cases of cardiac arrest and mortality following lamotrigine overdose. We undertook a systematic review of the literature on lamotrigine overdoses to better understand the clinical severity, the relevance of serum concentrations, and therapeutic interventions for overdose. OBJECTIVES: To characterize manifestations of acute lamotrigine overdose, determine if serum concentrations predict poisoning severity, and evaluate the effectiveness of overdose management interventions. METHODS: We performed a literature search across eight databases, including Medline, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library, from database inception to April 2014. Major bibliographic databases were updated on 31 May 2017. Articles were eligible if they described acute or acute on chronic lamotrigine overdose. At least one serum lamotrigine concentration had to be reported for inclusion. Reports on chronic poisoning, studies describing adverse effects of therapeutic use, and animal studies were excluded. RESULTS: We retrieved 6238 records; 48 (51 cases) met the inclusion criteria. Cases primarily involved adults (70.6%). Potentially life-threatening symptoms of overdose included seizures (55%), Glasgow Coma Scale </=8 (20%), hypotension (12%), and wide complex tachycardia (WCT) and cardiac arrest (6%). Among the 25 cases exposed to lamotrigine alone (13 adult; 12 pediatric), 2 adult fatalities occurred (4 g and 7.5 g ingested) and 8 pediatric cases experienced seizures (all children </=3.5-years-old, 75% without an underlying seizure disorder, >/= 525 mg ingested). The lowest seizure-associated serum concentration was 3.8 mg/L and 25.6 mg/L for pediatric and adult patients, respectively, suggesting children may be more susceptible to CNS toxicity. Cardiovascular toxicities occurred primarily in adult patients (threshold >25 mg/L). Overdose interventions included benzodiazepines (53%), propofol or barbiturates (14%), NaHCO(3) (20%), lipid therapy (12%), and extracorporeal elimination (10%). NaHCO(3) yielded no response in four of nine cases with conduction delays; however, two of the four cases subsequently responded with lipid therapy. CONCLUSIONS: Most cases reporting lamotrigine exposures observed mild or no toxicity; however, large exposures were associated with severe CNS depression, seizures, cardiac conduction delays, wide complex tachycardia, and death. In adults with a serum concentration >25 mg/L, severe toxicity may occur. In patients </=3.5 years of age, ingestions of >/=525 mg may produce severe CNS depression and seizures.
The mechanism of action of lamotrigine depends on voltage-sensitive sodium channels by which the neuronal membrane is stabilized and the release of excitatory neurotransmitters, such as glutamate and aspartate, is inhibited. Lamotrigine is indicated for maintenance treatment of bipolar I disorder to delay the time to the occurrence of mood episodes for those treated for acute mood episodes with standard therapy. There are significant gaps between clinical practices and research settings; data from controlled clinical trials of lamotrigine provide essential information about safety in bipolar populations because they result from large samples of patients with a specific disease and include comparisons with placebo or other comparators with randomized designs. In addition, lamotrigine's safety and tolerability data differ slightly in relation to disease entities, age ranges of the patients taking lamotrigine, and treatment conditions. For example, the incidence of serious rashes, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome, is approximately 0.8% (8/1000) in pediatric patients (2-16 years of age) receiving lamotrigine as adjunctive therapy for epilepsy and 0.3% (3/1000) in adults on adjunctive therapy for epilepsy. In clinical trials of bipolar and other mood disorders, the rate of serious rash was 0.08% (0.8/1000) in adult patients receiving lamotrigine as initial monotherapy and 0.13% (1.3/1000) in adult patients receiving lamotrigine as adjunctive therapy. Hence, in this study, we focus on the data regarding the safety and tolerability of lamotrigine in the treatment of bipolar disorder gathered from 12 placebo-controlled trials, regardless of publication status, that were sponsored by GlaxoSmithKline. We also inform clinicians of practical issues in safety and tolerability in the use of lamotrigine in the treatment of bipolar disorders.
The plasma concentration of lamotrigine (LTG) and its metabolites has great interindividual variability. An UHPLC-MS/MS method for simultaneous determination of LTG and lamotrigine N2-glucuronide (LTG N2-GLUC), lamotrigine N2-oxide was developed, validated, and applied in 58 plasma samples. The ion transition was m/z 256.0 > 144.9 for LTG, 432.1 > 256.0 for LTG N2-GLUC, 272.2 > 241.9 for LTG N2-oxide, and 259.1 > 144.8 for LTG-(13)C(3) (internal standard). The flow rate was 0.4 mL/min with a run time of 3 min. The calibration range was 0.025-2 mg/L for LTG and LTG N2-GLUC, and 0.000625-0.05 mg/L for LTG N2-oxide. For all analytes, the intra-day and inter-day bias and imprecision were -11.7-5.7 % and less than 14.3 %, and the internal standard normalized recovery and matrix factor were 91.7-101.5 % and 98.1-110.1 % with CV < 13. 7%. Ten- and twenty-fold dilution with blank plasma did not affect the analysis. All analytes were stable in plasma at room temperature for 8 h, at -80  degrees C for 80 days, and after 3 freeze-thaw cycles. The LTG N2-GLUC/LTG ratio was 0.44 in LTG monotherapy group. The ratio was reduced to 0.17 when co-administrated with valproic acid, while elevated to 0.82 when co-administrated with enzyme inducer. In conclusion, this method is suitable for simultaneous determination of LTG, LTG N2-GLUC and LTG N2-oxide in human plasma.
Physiologically-based biopharmaceutics modeling (PBBM) has potential to accelerate the development of new drug and formulations. An important application of PBBM is for special populations such as pediatrics that have pharmacokinetics dependent on the maturation process. Lamotrigine (LTG) is a Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS) II drug and is widely prescribed. Therefore, the goal of this study was to assess the biopharmaceutics risk of the low-soluble drug LTG when the ontogeny on gastrointestinal tract (GIT) physiological parameters are considered. An oral physiologically-based pharmacokinetic model and a PBBM were developed and verified using GastroPlus software for both adults and children (2-12 years old, 12-52 kg). The biopharmaceutics properties and GIT physiological parameters were evaluated by sensitivity analysis. High doses were simulated assuming a worst case scenario, that is, the dose of 200 mg for adults and 5 mg/kg (up to the maximum of 200 mg) for 2-year-old children. Although several authors have suggested that ontogeny may have an effect on gastrointestinal fluid volume, our study found no evidence of interference between fluid and dose volumes with in vivo dissolution of LTG. The most impactful parameter was found to be the gastric transit time. Therefore, the hypothesis is developed to examine whether LTG exhibits characteristics of a BCS II classification in vitro while showing BCS I-like behavior in vivo. This hypothesis could act as a base for conducting novel studies on model-informed precision dosing, tailored to specific populations and clinical conditions. In addition, it could be instrumental in assessing the influence of various release profiles on in vivo performance for both adult and pediatric populations.
Movement disorders such as tremor and ataxia occur commonly during therapy with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Dystonias, however, are rare. Blepharospasm, although reported with neuroleptic agents, has never been reported with AEDs. Our patient developed blepharospasm during therapy with lamotrigine.
