In a double-masked, randomized, controlled clinical trial, the authors evaluated the ocular hypotensive efficacy of twice-daily treatment with levobunolol (0.25 and 0.5%) and betaxolol (0.5%) in 85 patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension. During the 3-month study, intraocular pressure (IOP) reductions in the two levobunolol groups were significantly greater than in the betaxolol group. From a mean baseline IOP of approximately 25 mmHg, overall mean reductions were 6.2 and 6.0 mmHg for the 0.25 and 0.5% levobunolol groups, respectively, and 3.7 mmHg for the betaxolol group. No clinically or statistically significant among-group differences were noted in the systemic safety variables evaluated. These data suggest that although all three treatments are effective, levobunolol provides a greater reduction in IOP than betaxolol.
In a double-masked, randomized, comparison titration study to determine the effective dose of topically applied levobunolol, three concentrations of levobunolol (0.25%, 0.5%, and 1%) and of timolol (0.125%, 0.25%, and 0.5%) were evaluated in patients with mild open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension. Following a washout of ocular hypotensive medication, twice-daily treatment in both eyes was initiated with the lowest of the three doses of either drug. The concentration was increased if intraocular pressure remained uncontrolled. Intraocular pressure was controlled in 63% (15 of 24) of the patients tested with the lowest concentration of levobunolol and 69% (18 of 26) with the lowest concentration of timolol. Overall, 75% (18 of 24) of the patients in the levobunolol group and 73% (19 of 26) of the patients in the timolol group had adequately controlled intraocular pressure. At the lowest concentrations tested, mean decreases from baseline in intraocular pressure ranged from 6 to 8 mm Hg in both treatment groups.
Topical levobunolol 0.5% was compared with topical metipranolol 0.6% for efficacy, safety, and comfort in 46 patients with open angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension. The study was of parallel design, randomised, double-masked, and of three months' duration. After a washout interval the study medications were instilled twice daily in both eyes. The overall mean decrease in intraocular pressure (IOP) was approximately 7 mmHg in both groups. More than 90% of patients in both groups successfully completed the study. Both agents caused slight decreases in heart rate and blood pressure. More complaints of burning and stinging were reported in the metipranolol group than in the levobunolol group. This three-month, 46-patient study showed levobunolol 0.5% and metipranolol 0.6% to be similarly effective ocular hypotensive agents.
We compared the efficacy of timolol maleate ophthalmic gel-forming solution 0.5% QD with that of levobunolol hydrochloride 0.5% BID, as measured by change in intraocular pressure (IOP), effect on heart rate, and ocular tolerability. The study had a positive-controlled, double-masked, randomized, multicenter, 12-week, two-period (6 weeks each), crossover design. One hundred fifty-two patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension were randomized to receive either timolol maleate gel-forming solution QD or levobunolol BID for 6 weeks, followed by a crossover to the alternate treatment. IOP and heart rate were measured at morning trough and peak during weeks 3, 6, 9, and 12. Timolol maleate gel-forming solution QD was comparable to levobunolol BID in reducing IOP at peak and trough. Although the effects on peak heart rate were similar between the two medications, the effect on trough heart rate of timolol maleate gel-forming solution QD was significantly less than that of levobunolol BID (P = 0.001). The incidence of ocular burning and stinging was comparable between the two treatments. Patients experienced significantly more blurred vision when using timolol maleate gel-forming solution than when using levobunolol (P = 0.013). Overall, more patients experienced at least one adverse event when using timolol maleate gel-forming solution. Timolol maleate gel-forming solution QD is as efficacious in reducing IOP as levobunolol BID.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the prophylactic effect of levobunolol 0.5%, timolol 0.5%, or vehicle in reducing the incidence of postoperative intraocular pressure (IOP) spikes of 5 and 10 mm Hg or more in patients having neodymium:YAG (Nd:YAG) laser posterior capsulotomy. SETTING: Miami Vision Center, Coral Gables, Florida; Cullen Eye Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Cincinnati Eye Institute, Cincinnati, Ohio; South Texas Cataract and Glaucoma Center, San Antonio, Texas; Mid-South Eye Foundation, Memphis, Tennessee, USA. METHODS: This prospective, double-masked, randomized study comprised 144 patients having Nd:YAG laser posterior capsulotomy in one eye. One drop of the test medication was administered preoperatively and one drop on the evening after surgery; IOP was measured preoperatively and 1,2,3 and 24 hours postoperatively. RESULTS: Intraocular pressure elevations of 5 mm Hg or more were seen in 1 of 60 patients (2%) in the levobunolol group, 4 of 54 (7%) in the timolol group, and 10 of 28 (36%) in the vehicle group. These elevations occurred significantly more frequently in the vehicle group than in the levobunolol (P < .001) or timolol (P < .004) groups. Elevations of 10 mm Hg or more were found in 2 of 28 patients (7%) treated with vehicle but were not observed in the patients treated with levobunolol or timolol. CONCLUSIONS: Levobunolol 0.5% or timolol 0.5% administered preoperatively and again in the evening after Nd:YAG laser capsulotomy effectively blunted the IOP rise that frequently follows laser surgery.
PURPOSE: To provide an in vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM) and impression cytology analysis of preserved-and unpreserved levobunolol-induced changes of conjunctival epithelium. METHODS: 27 eyes of 27 patients were consecutively randomized to receive preserved or unpreserved levobunolol; all patients had a recent diagnosis of primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) or ocular hypertension and were not previously treated with topical medications. IVCM and impression cytology were performed before and after six months of therapy. Goblet cells density and a conjunctival epithelium regularity index were considered in the IVCM analysis, whereas impression cytology specimens were graded and scored in accordance with Nelson's method. RESULTS: After six months of therapy, IVCM and impression cytology parameters showed significant differences with respect to baseline in both groups (p<0.001); significant differences were also found between the two groups (p<0.001). The IVCM analysis showed a goblet cells density reduction (61% and 17% from baseline, respectively in group 1 and 2) (p<0.001) and an higher index of epithelial regularity (p<0.001) in both groups; the impression cytology analysis showed an higher score in both groups (p<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: All the IVCM and impression cytology parameters correlated well with the conjunctival modifications induced by the topical therapy, suggesting the less toxicity of unpreserved drugs.
The purpose of this study was to compare the ocular hypotensive efficacy and tolerability of 0.5% timolol maleate ophthalmic gel-forming solution (timolol gel) and 0.5% levobunolol hydrochloride (levobunolol). This was a randomized, double-masked, multi-center, active-controlled, 2-period, crossover study. After a 3-week, single-masked placebo run-in phase, patients with ocular hypertension or open-angle glaucoma and an intraocular pressure (IOP) > or = 22 mmHg were randomized to receive timolol gel QD or levobunolol BID for 6 weeks followed by a 3-week, placebo washout period. Patients were then crossed over to the alternate treatment for 6 weeks. IOP and heart rate (HR) were measured at 3 and 6 weeks after the start of therapy with either timolol gel or levobunolol. Of 133 patients randomized, 116 received both treatments. Timolol gel QD was comparable to levobunolol BID in reducing trough and peak IOP. At trough, HR was marginally increased with timolol gel and was decreased with levobunolol (p = < 0.001). At peak, HR was decreased with both treatments, but the decrease was significantly less with timolol gel than with levobunolol (p = 0.049). Significantly more patients experienced at least one adverse event (p = 0.024), adverse events related to special senses (p = 0.002), and burning and stinging (p < 0.001) with levobunolol compared to timolol gel. The study demonstrates that timolol gel QD has IOP-lowering effects comparable to those of levobunolol BID with fewer adverse experiences and less effect on HR.
CONTEXT: Levobunolol is a beta-blocker drug prescribed for the control and prevention of cardiovascular events, such as individuals with cardiac arrhythmia or a history of myocardial infarction. Creating a levobunolol-specific molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) allows for enhanced selectivity, efficient sample preparation, controlled drug delivery, and improved sensing and detection capabilities. In this sense, the aim of this study was to obtain through DFT calculations the synthesis protocol of a MIP for levobunolol testing different functional monomers (FMs), solvents, and cross-linker agents (CLAs). The analysis of structural and energetic data led to the identification of the optimal MIP synthesis parameters, which involves the use of (trifluoromethyl)-arylic acid (TFMAA) as the functional monomer, toluene and chloroform as the solvents, and pentaerythritol triacrylate (PETRA) as the cross-linking agent. This rational design offers valuable insights for experimentalists seeking to efficiently synthesize a MIP for this important beta-blocker drug. METHODS: DFT calculations were conducted using the B97D functional along with the Pople's split valence 6-31G(d,p) basis set, which includes polarization functions on all atoms (B97D/6-31G(d,p)).
In a 3-month, double-masked, randomized clinical trial, the ocular hypotensive efficacy and systemic safety of 0.5% levobunolol and 2% carteolol were compared in 59 patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension. The overall mean decrease in intraocular pressure was 7.3 mm Hg (27.4%) in the 0.5% levobunolol group and 4.1 mm Hg (14.8%) in the carteolol group. This difference was statistically significant (p = 0.0004). Changes in visual field and cup-disk ratios were few and similar between the groups. Effects on mean heart rate were noted in both treatment groups. The mean decrease in heart rate in the carteolol group was greater (-8.4 beats/min) than in the levobunolol group (-3.1 beats/min). This difference had marginal statistical significance (p = 0.059). We conclude that 0.5% levobunolol and 2% carteolol administered twice daily differ in lowering intraocular pressure as well as in their effects on heart rate.
The efficacy of twice-daily treatment with 0.5% levobunolol hydrochloride was compared with that of 0.5% timolol maleate in 27 patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension in a double-blind randomized trial. At all follow-up visits the patients in both groups had significantly decreased intraocular pressure (p less than 0.05); there was no significant difference between the groups. Levobunolol produced significant decreases in mean heart rate (p less than 0.05). One patient with an undisclosed history of childhood asthma experienced bronchospasm related to an acute upper respiratory tract infection while receiving levobunolol. Neither drug caused any significant ocular problems. The results show a clear ocular hypotensive effect with twice-daily 0.5% levobunolol.
Two concentrations of levobunolol (0.5% and 1%) and one concentration of timolol (0.5%) were evaluated for the control of elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) in a double-masked, randomized study. Fifty-one patients received one of the three study treatments in both eyes bid for one year. Both drugs were equally effective in reducing IOP: The overall reduction in mean IOP was slightly more than 9 mm Hg in all three treatment groups. Levobunolol was as safe and effective as timolol for the long-term control of elevated IOP.
