BACKGROUND: Lidocaine, an amide anesthetic, has been used in the treatment of a wide variety of pain disorders for over 75 years. In addition to pain control, lidocaine is an anti-arrhythmic agent and has anti-inflammatory properties. Lidocaine's unique properties, including nonlinear pharmacokinetics, have limited its modern-day use. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this review is to offer a better understanding of the properties of this unique treatment, which we hope will allow more practitioners to offer this to their patients. METHODS: An analysis of the history, pharmacokinetics, and relevant uses of lidocaine in headache medicine based on a synthesis of the medical literature and clinical experience. RESULTS: Lidocaine is an amide anesthetic that inhibits voltage gated sodium channels, and lidocaine metabolism occurs exclusively in the liver. One lidocaine metabolite has its own unique properties and may be an active form of the drug. CONCLUSION: Open label and retrospective studies have investigated the use of lidocaine in many headache disorders, primarily via injection or infusion. Further research into the active metabolite of lidocaine may allow for its use as a novel nonopiate treatment of chronic pain.
A simple high-performance liquid chromatographic procedure for quantifying lidocaine and nine of its metabolites in human plasma and urine is described. This method involves aqueous acetylation of the metabolites with acetic anhydride under mild basic conditions (pH approximately 8.5). Lidocaine and the derivatized metabolites are extracted under basic conditions with ethyl acetate. Calibration curves constructed for these compounds are linear in the concentration range studied (0.2-500 micrograms/ml). The relevance of this method is shown by measuring the plasma and urine profiles of two patients with suspected myocardial infarction.
Sustained release of lidocaine from poly ethylene-co-vinyl acetate (EVA) implants can significantly improve pain management outcomes; however, poor drug loading is a major limitation. Recently, myristic acid was found to improve drug loading in EVA by inhibiting the crystallization of lidocaine. Here, lidocaine's interaction with myristic acid was studied by differential scanning calorimetry. Spectra of lidocaine-myristic acid mixtures were analysed using two-dimensional correlation (2DCOS) maps. Furthermore, spectroscopic analysis of EVA matrices containing lidocaine, alone and in combination with myristic acid, was also performed and drug release was evaluated in vitro. A eutectic was obtained on combining lidocaine and myristic acid at the molar ratio of 1:1 due to loss of myristic acid's dimeric conformation resulting in hydrogen bonding of its COOH group with lidocaine's amide I moieties. In EVA, hydrogen bonding between adjacent lidocaine molecules caused crystallization above a threshold concentration and could be inhibited by incorporation of myristic acid by eutectic formation. By altering the molecular confirmation and solid state properties of lidocaine in EVA, myristic acid reduces lidocaine crystallization, increases drug loading and influences drug release kinetics. Exploiting these interactions and promoting further hydrogen bonding through the addition of specific excipients presents a viable strategy to enhance and stabilise drug loading in polymer matrices for various applications.
Plasma concentrations of lidocaine were measured over a period of three hours following the instillation of lidocaine jelly (Xylocaine 2% Jelly) into the genitourinary tract of 30 patients (15 male, 15 female) scheduled for cystoscopy. The mean quantity of jelly instilled was 21.4 Gm (11-27.5 Gm) and of lidocaine HCl administered thereby 428 mg (218-550 mg). Plasma concentration reached measurable levels in only 5 cases, never exceeding 0.2 microgram/ml.
Two sensitive and selective analytical methods were developed for simultaneous determination of aminoacridine hydrochloride and lidocaine hydrochloride in bulk powder and pharmaceutical formulation. Method A was based on HPLC separation of the cited drugs with determination of the toxic lidocaine-related impurity 2,6-dimethylaniline. The separation was achieved using reversed-phase column C18, 250 x 4.6 mm, 5 microm particle size and mobile phase consisting of 0.05 M disodium hydrogen phosphate dihydrate (pH 6.0 +/- 0.2 adjusted with phosphoric acid) and acetonitrile (55 : 45, v/v). Quantitation was achieved with UV detection at 240 nm. Linear calibration curve was in the range of 1.00-10.00, 13.20-132.00 and 1.32-13.20 microg mL(-1) for aminoacridine hydrochloride, lidocaine hydrochloride and 2,6-dimethylaniline, respectively. Method B was based on TLC separation of the cited drugs followed by densitometric measurement at 365 nm on the fluorescent mode for aminoacridine hydrochloride and 220 nm on the absorption mode for lidocaine hydrochloride. The separation was carried out using ethyl acetate-methanol-acetic acid (65 : 30 : 5 by volume) as a developing system. The calibration curve was in the range of 25.00-250.00 ng spot(-1) and 0.99-9.90 microg spot(-1) for aminoacridine hydrochloride and lidocaine hydrochloride, respectively. The results obtained were statistically analyzed and compared with those obtained by applying the manufacturer's method.
High doses of lidocaine are administered to patients undergoing liposuction. Monoethylglycinexylidide, the active metabolite of lidocaine, is 80 to 90 percent as potent as lidocaine, and its relative toxicity is approximately that of lidocaine. Monoethylglycinexylidide has not previously been measured in studies on lidocaine in liposuction. The aims of this study were to characterize systemic exposure to lidocaine and monoethylglycinexylidide and to measure lidocaine and monoethylglycinexylidide levels within the tissues. Five female volunteers between the ages of 29 and 40 years underwent liposuction. Lidocaine (1577 to 2143 mg, corresponding to 19.9 to 27.6 mg/kg) was infiltrated during the procedure. Levels of lidocaine and monoethylglycinexylidide in blood and lipoaspirate were assessed perioperatively. Tissue lidocaine and monoethylglycinexylidide levels were measured postoperatively using a microdialysis technique in vivo. The peak (maximal) concentration of lidocaine plus monoethylglycinexylidide was 2.2 to 2.7 microg/ml. Time to peak lidocaine plus monoethylglycinexylidide was 8 to 28 hours after infiltration began. Absorbed lidocaine was estimated to be 911 to 1596 mg; therefore, 45 to 93 percent (mean, 64 percent) of the infiltrated dose was ultimately absorbed. Lipoaspirate analysis showed that 9.1 to 10.8 percent (mean, 9.7 percent) of the infiltrated dose was removed during the procedure. Tissue lidocaine levels below 5 microg/ml were demonstrated from 4 to 8 hours postoperatively. The peak lidocaine plus monoethylglycinexylidide concentration was within safe limits in this group of subjects. Time to peak lidocaine plus monoethylglycinexylidide signifies a delayed peak and therefore a longer period of potential lidocaine toxicity than was originally thought. Microdialysis results demonstrated that tissue lidocaine levels may be subtherapeutic within 4 to 8 hours of the procedure. Investigation into factors controlling the resorption of lidocaine during liposuction is warranted in an effort to improve the duration of effect. Furthermore, considering the active metabolite monoethylglycinexylidide, longitudinal studies are necessary to determine whether improving the side effect profile of lidocaine by reducing the dose administered during liposuction may be possible without decreasing the perioperative analgesic effect.
Concentrations of lidocaine and MEGX were determined in a variety of tissues and other samples collected at autopsy. In 13 of the cases examined in which lidocaine was associated with death, tissue concentrations were greater than 15 mg/kg. Tissue concentrations in other patients treated with lidocaine were significantly lower.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the physical compatibility and chemical stability of mixtures of magnesium sulphate and lidocaine in order to determine the feasibility of manufacturing a prefilled syringe combining these two drugs for use as an intramuscular (IM) loading dose for eclampsia prevention and/or treatment. This ready-to-use mixture will provide a more tolerable and accessible route of administration appropriate for widespread use. METHODS: Physical compatibility (pH, colour, and formation of precipitate) and chemical stability (maintaining > 90% of initial concentrations) of mixtures of MgSO(4), using both commercially available MgSO(4) (50%) and MgSO(4) reconstituted from salt (61%), with lidocaine hydrochloride (2%) were evaluated every 14 days over six months. The concentration of lidocaine was determined by a stability indicating high performance liquid chromatographic method, while the concentration of magnesium was determined by an automated chemistry analyzer. RESULTS: No changes in pH, color or precipitates were observed for up to 6 months. The 95% confidence interval of the slope of the curve relating concentration to time, determined by linear regression, indicated that only the admixtures of commercially-available magnesium sulfate and lidocaine as well as the 61% magnesium sulfate solution (reconstituted from salt) maintained at least 90% of the initial concentration of both drugs at 25 degrees C and 40 degrees C at 6 months. CONCLUSIONS: Commercially available MgSO4 and lidocaine hydrochloride, when combined, are stable in a pre-filled syringe for at least six months in high heat and humidity conditions. This finding represents the first step in improving the administration of magnesium sulphate in the treatment and prevention of eclampsia in under-resourced settings.
OBJECTIVE: To compare four different methods of endotracheal lidocaine administration with respect to the site of administration. DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial. SETTING: University hospital. PATIENTS: Thirty-two female patients (43.6 +/- 11.5 years old) undergoing elective gynecologic operations with an anesthesiologic risk classification not higher than ASA II. All patients gave their written informed consent to participate in the study. INTERVENTIONS: Lidocaine at a dose of 2 mg/kg, diluted with normal saline to a total volume of 10 mL, was administered to eight patients by instilling the drug solution from a 10-mL syringe directly into the outer aperture of the endotracheal tube. All other study patients received lidocaine under bronchoscopic control through the work channel of the bronchoscope either a) deep endotracheally, b) into the right main bronchus, or c) into the right lower lobe bronchus. At 10 points in time after drug administration, blood samples were taken for measurement of lidocaine plasma concentration (using high-pressure liquid chromatography) and blood gas analysis. MAIN MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Therapeutic blood concentrations (greater than or equal to 1.4 micrograms/mL) could be achieved and toxic blood concentrations (greater than or equal to 6 micrograms/mL) could be avoided with all methods of administration. No significant difference was found between the different methods with regard to peak concentration, time to peak, onset and duration of therapeutic levels, or relative bioavailability. A significant (p less than .05) decrease in PaO2 to 75% of the baseline was seen with all methods used. CONCLUSIONS: Because no route of lidocaine administration was superior to the others, the simplest method (instillation into the endotracheal tube) should be used.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of age on lidocaine absorption and metabolism after application to the oropharynx and vocal cords in a manner similar to preparation for flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Five healthy volunteers were studied in each of two age groups: from 25 to 37 and 60 to 68 years of age. Each volunteer had a total of lidocaine 300 mg administered as a gargle, gel, or directly to the vocal cords. Blood samples and expectorant were collected to determine concentrations of lidocaine and its metabolites, monoethylglycinxylidide (MEGX) and glycinxylidide (GX). No differences in peak plasma lidocaine concentrations, 2.09 +/- 1.28 mumol/L (1 microgram/mL = 4.27 mumol/L) in young subjects, and 2.35 +/- 0.85 mumol/L in young-elderly subjects, or lidocaine AUC were seen between the two age groups. Lidocaine recovered in expectorant ranged from 96 to 168 mg. This study suggests that, over the age range studied, increased age does not impair lidocaine absorption from the oropharynx or lidocaine metabolism when topical lidocaine is used during flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Predicting the haemodynamic changes that may result in myocardial ischaemia for patients undergoing laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation will help to avoid events that trigger ischaemia and allow immediate treatment. The objective of this study was to compare the effects of esmolol with those of lidocaine (lignocaine) and fentanyl on prevention of tachycardia and hypertension caused by endotracheal intubation. METHODS: This was a prospective, randomised, double-blind study. The study was conducted at the Adnan Menderes University Hospital in Aydin, Turkey and involved 120 patients of American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status I or II aged 20-50 years. The patients were randomised into four equal groups. The control group (group C) received dextrose 5% 5 mL, the esmolol group (group E) received esmolol 1.5 mg/kg, the fentanyl group (group F) received fentanyl 1 microg/kg and the lidocaine group (group L) received lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg 2 minutes before endotracheal intubation. Heart rate (HR), mean arterial pressure (MAP) and rate-pressure product (RPP) were recorded before and after induction of anaesthesia, immediately after intubation, and 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 minutes after intubation. RESULTS: Compared with control, HR decreased significantly in group E after induction, immediately after intubation and 1 minute after intubation (p < 0.0083). In group F there was an increase in MAP immediately after intubation, but the increase was less than in other groups. Compared with control, RPP decreased significantly in groups E and F after induction, immediately after intubation and 1 minute after intubation (p < 0.0083). RPP was significantly lower in group E than in controls and group L 3 minutes after intubation (p < 0.0083), and it was significantly lower in group F than in controls 10 minutes after intubation (p < 0.0083). CONCLUSION: It can be concluded that administration of esmolol 1.5 mg/kg 2 minutes before intubation prevents tachycardia and an increase in RPP caused by laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation, and can be beneficial when administered before laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation in patients with tachycardia.
The concentrations of lidocaine and of its deethylated metabolite, MEGX, were measured in blood following the intravenous administration of 50 and 100 mg lidocaine hydrochloride, the oral administration of 100, 300, and 500 mg lidocaine hydrochloride monohydrate, and the oral administration of 300 mg lidocaine hydrochloride monohydrate every 8 h for seven doses, to three healthy volunteers. The range of values for the parameters defining the disposition kinetics of lidocaine were: terminal half-life, 50-231 min; total clearance, 13-17 ml/min/kg; initial dilution space, 0.13-2.5 liters/kg; and volume of distribution at steady state, 0.6-4.5 liters/kg. Lidocaine absorption from solution was rapid, but due to presystemic hepatic metabolism, the availability was low, the range of average values lying between 0.19 and 0.38. No dose or time dependency in lidocaine and monoethylglycinexylidide pharmacokinetics following the single dose studies of lidocaine were noted. Effective hepatic blood flow, based on total clearance and availability measurements, was estimated to be 18-27 ml/min/kg. The concentrations of MEGX were approximately one-third of those of lidocaine following intravenous lidocaine and were comparable following oral lidocaine, but as predicted, the dose normalized area under the MEGX concentration-time curve was constant and independent of the route of administration of lidocaine. In two subjects, the blood concentrations of lidocaine and MEGX following multiple doses of oral lidocaine were those predicted from the single dose studies. In the third subject, the degree of accumulation of lidocaine was greater than predicted. The reasons and mechanism for this difference between subjects on multiple dosing remains unclear.
Twenty-six patients, ASA physical status 1, scheduled for elective cesarean section, were divided at random into two groups and received via an epidural catheter 20 ml of 2.2% lidocaine hydrocarbonate (17.3 mg.ml-1 lidocaine base) with 5 micrograms.ml-1 epinephrine freshly added (Group CO2 = 13 patients) or 20 ml of 2% lidocaine hydrochloride (17.3 mg.ml-1 lidocaine base) also with 5 micrograms.ml-1 epinephrine freshly added. Following clampage of the umbilical cord (at 40.1 +/- 4.9 min after the injection of lidocaine for the CO2 group and at 41.0 +/- 5.4 min for the HCl group), serum concentrations of lidocaine were measured both in the mother and in the umbilical vein. All newborns were examined by the same blinded pediatrician with Apgar scores at 1, 5 and 10 min and with Neurobehavioral Adaptive Capacity Scores (NACS) at 15 min, 2 h and 24 h. The concentrations of lidocaine in the serum were comparable in both groups: in the mothers 8.61 +/- 1.48 mumol.l-1 for the CO2 group vs 8.04 +/- 2.36 mumol.l-1 for the HCl group and in the newborns 3.86 +/- 0.84 mumol.l-1 for the CO2 group vs 3.92 +/- 0.95 mumol.l-1 for the HCl group. The ratio of umbilical vein to maternal vein concentrations of lidocaine was also similar in both groups: 0.45 +/- 0.07 for the CO2 group vs 0.54 +/- 0.24 for the HCl group. The percentage of newborns with a normal NACS (score > or = 35/40) was equal in both groups, i.e. 91% at 15 min and 2 h of life and 100% at 24 h of life.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
A randomized, double-blind study was carried out on 40 unpremedicated, ASA I-II adult surgical outpatients to assess the effects of aerosolized lidocaine, intravenous lidocaine, both, or neither, on circulatory responses to laryngoscopy and intubation. Lidocaine (4 mg/kg) or saline was given by nebulizer in the holding area beginning at -15 minutes. The patient underwent a standardized induction of anesthesia that included IV curare (3 mg) and O2 by facemask at minute 2, followed by IV thiopental (5 mg/kg) and succinylcholine (1.5 mg/kg) at minute 5. Lidocaine (2 mg/kg) or saline was given by IV push at minute 4. Laryngoscopy was begun at 5 minutes and continued for 45 seconds before intubation. Heart rate and systolic, diastolic, and mean blood pressures were automatically recorded at 1-minute intervals from 0 to 11 minutes. The four treatment groups included: group 1, aerosolized and IV saline; group 2, aerosolized saline, IV lidocaine; group 3, aerosolized lidocaine, IV saline; and group 4, aerosolized and IV lidocaine. There were no differences among the four treatment groups (n = ten per group) in any of the four hemodynamic variables before laryngoscopy and intubation. Within each group, after intubation all four hemodynamic variables increased significantly over the corresponding baseline values for that group. However, the maximum values attained after intubation did not differ significantly among the four treatment groups for any of the four hemodynamic variables, whether those maxima were expressed as absolute values or as a percentage of baseline.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Systemic lidocaine used in continuous infusion during the peri-operative period has analgesic, anti-hyperalgesic, as well as anti-inflammatory properties. This makes it capable of reducing the use of opioids and inhalational anaesthetics, and the early return of bowel function, and patient hospital stay. The aim of this narrative review was to highlight the pharmacology and indications for clinical application, along with new and interesting research areas. The clinical applications of peri-operative lidocaine infusion have been reviewed in several recent systematic reviews and meta-analyses in patients undergoing open and laparoscopic abdominal procedures, ambulatory procedures, and other types of surgery. Peri-operative lidocaine infusion may be a useful analgesic adjunct in enhanced recovery protocols. Potential benefits of intravenous lidocaine in chronic post-surgical pain, post-operative cognitive dysfunction, and cancer recurrence are under investigation. Due to its immunomodulation properties over surgical stress, current evidence suggests that intravenous lidocaine could be used in the context of multimodal analgesia.
