Agitation is a common and costly phenomenon associated with a number of psychiatric conditions including schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Early identification and prompt intervention to relieve the symptoms of agitation are essential to avoid symptomatic escalation and emergence of aggressive behaviour. Recent consensus guidelines emphasise the need for non-coercive management strategies to protect the therapeutic alliance between patients and their healthcare providers-an alliance that is critical for the effective management of chronic psychiatric conditions. Rapid symptom relief and de-escalation of agitation are necessary to avoid the costly and traumatic use of coercive techniques of physical restraint and seclusion, which require admission and prolonged hospitalisation. Inhaled loxapine is approved for the treatment of acute agitation in patients with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. Clinical studies have confirmed the efficacy, rapid onset of action, and safety and tolerability of this agent in the psychiatric emergency and hospital settings. Emerging data have indicated the potential for inhaled loxapine as a self-administered agent for use in the community setting without the direct supervision of a healthcare professional. We discuss the evolving treatment paradigm and the place of inhaled medications for acutely agitated patients both within and outside the emergency and hospital setting.
This multisite open-label study sought to characterize the pharmacokinetics and safety of a single dose of inhaled loxapine in children and adolescents. Loxapine powder for oral inhalation was administered via a single-use handheld drug device to children and adolescents (aged 10-17 years) with any condition warranting chronic antipsychotic use. Patients were dosed according to body weight and cohort (<50 kg [n = 15], 2.5 or 5 mg; >/=50 kg [n = 15], 5 or 10 mg); the first 6 patients (cohort 1) enrolled in each weight group received the lower dose. Patients were enrolled in the higher-dose group (cohort 2) after an interim pharmacokinetic and safety analysis of data from cohort 1. Blood samples were collected for 48 hours after dosing to determine the pharmacokinetic profile of loxapine and its metabolites. Safety was assessed using adverse event (AE), laboratory value, physical/neurologic examination, vital sign, electrocardiogram, suicidality, and extrapyramidal symptom assessment. Thirty patients were enrolled and evaluable for pharmacokinetics. Loxapine plasma concentrations peaked by 2 to 5 minutes in most patients; systemic exposure increased with dose in both weight subgroups. Loxapine terminal elimination half-life was  approximately 13 to 17 hours. The most common AEs were sedation and dysgeusia. Sedation was severe in 1 patient in the <50-kg group (2.5-mg dose) and 1 patient in the >/=50-kg group (5-mg dose). No AEs indicative of bronchospasm or other serious AEs were reported. Inhaled loxapine was rapidly absorbed and generally well tolerated in pediatric patients; no new safety signals were observed.
Drug development and repurposing are urgently needed for individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and psychiatric comorbidity, which often presents as aggression and self-injury. Areas covered: We review dopamine antagonists, including classical and atypical, as well as unconventional antipsychotics in ASD. The older antipsychotic loxapine is discussed in terms of preliminary albeit limited evidence in ASD. Emerging promise of amitriptyline in ASD is discussed, together with promising BDNF effects of loxapine and amitriptyline. Expert opinion: In ASD, pharmacotherapy and specifically dopamine antagonist drugs are often prescribed for challenging behaviors including aggression. The novel antipsychotics risperidone and aripiprazole have received most study in ASD and are FDA-approved for irritability in children with ASD over age 5 years; individuals with ASD are prone to weight gain, Type II diabetes and associated side effects. Low dose loxapine has properties of classical and novel antipsychotics but importantly appears more weight neutral, and with promising use in adolescents and adults with ASD. Amitriptyline appears effective in ASD for irritability, aggression, gastrointestinal problems, and insomnia, in children, adolescents and adults however our adult data on amitriptyline in ASD is still in preparation for publication. Both loxapine and amitriptyline may stimulate BDNF; further studies are warranted.
OBJECTIVES: Our clinical experience with low dose loxapine (5-15 mg/day) suggests promising efficacy and safety for irritability in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). We studied low dose loxapine prospectively in adolescents and adults with ASD and irritability. Additionally, we measured loxapine and metabolite concentrations, and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) as a biomarker of neuromodulation. METHODS: We performed a 12 week open trial of add-on loxapine in subjects, ages 13-65 years, diagnosed with ASD, and Aberrant Behavior Checklist-Irritability (ABC-I) subscale scores >14. Loxapine was dosed flexibly up to 15 mg daily, starting with 5 mg on alternate days. From weeks 1 to 6, other psychoactive medications were tapered if possible; from weeks 6 to 12, all medication doses were held stable. The primary outcome was the Clinical Global Impressions-Improvement subscale (CGI-I), ratings of Much Improved or Very Much Improved. Secondary outcomes were the ABC-I, Repetitive Behavior Scale-Revised, and Schalock Quality of Life scale. Serum BDNF and loxapine and metabolite concentrations were assayed. BDNF rs6265 was genotyped. RESULTS: Sixteen subjects were enrolled; 12 completed all visits. Median age was 18 years (range 13-39). Median final loxapine dose was 7.5 mg/day (2.5-15). All 14 subjects (100%) with data at week 12 were rated as Much Improved on CGI-I at 12 weeks. Mean change on ABC-I at 12 weeks was -31%, p=0.01. Mean body mass index (BMI)-Z decreased between weeks 6 and 12, p=0.03. Side effects were minimal, and prolactin elevation occurred in only one subject. BDNF concentrations measured in 11 subjects increased significantly (p=0.04). Subjects with AG genotype for BDNF rs6265 required a lower dose of loxapine at study end, but had similar behavioral and BDNF concentration changes as the GG genotype. CONCLUSIONS: Low dose loxapine shows promise as a repurposed drug for irritability in ASD. Loxapine effects on BDNF warrant further study.
Loxapine is an antipsychotic medication used for the treatment of schizophrenia. In vivo, loxapine is metabolized to multiple metabolites. A high performance liquid chromatographic-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method has been developed and validated for the determination of loxapine and 4 of its metabolites, loxapine N-oxide, amoxapine (N-desmethyl loxapine), 8-hydroxyloxapine and 7-hydroxyloxapine, in human plasma to support regulated clinical development. During method development, several technical challenges such as poor chromatography, separation of structural isomers, and inadequate sensitivity were met and overcome. The final method utilized micro-elution solid phase extraction (SPE) to extract plasma samples (100muL), and the resulting extracts were analyzed using reversed phase LC-MS/MS using a turbo-ionspray interface in positive ionization mode with selected reaction monitoring (SRM). The method was fully validated according to the current regulatory guidance for bioanalysis over the calibration curve range 0.0500-50.0ng/mL for all analytes using 1/x(2)-weighted linear regression analysis. Based on three separate runs, the between-run precision and inter-day precision for all five analytes at all concentrations, including the LLOQ (lower limit of quantitation) quality control at 0.0500ng/mL, varied from 0.0% to 13.8%, while the accuracy ranged from 86.4% to 109.3% of nominal. The extraction recoveries of loxapine and the four metabolites were above 80%. Various forms of short-term and long-term stability were established in both solutions and matrix, including the stability of loxapine and the four metabolites in human plasma for up to 260days of storage at -20 degrees C. This method has been used to support a regulated clinical study, which included the successful execution of incurred sample reanalysis (ISR) testing. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first published methodology in which these five analytes were quantified with a single extraction and injection.
OBJECTIVE: To report a potential interaction between carbamazepine (CBZ), an anticonvulsant medication, and loxapine, an antipsychotic. CBZ is being increasingly used to treat a variety of psychiatric disorders. Because of this, the potential for multiple-drug therapy and subsequent drug interactions is increased. METHODS: We prospectively monitored plasma CBZ and carbamazepine epoxide (CBZE) concentrations in a single patient during and after withdrawal of loxapine comedication. Additionally, we retrospectively evaluated four patients who had received concomitant therapy with CBZ and loxapine. RESULTS: Plasma CBZE/CBZ ratios decreased from 0.76 to 0.18 following discontinuation of loxapine. Absolute CBZE plasma concentrations also decreased from 1.7 to 0.6 micrograms/mL after loxapine therapy was stopped. Retrospectively screened patients who were receiving concomitant loxapine-CBZ therapy all had unusually elevated CBZE/CBZ plasma concentration ratios (0.75-1.91). CONCLUSIONS: These cases suggest that an interaction occurs between loxapine and CBZ. Possible mechanisms include either induction of CBZ metabolism to its epoxide metabolite, or inhibition of the enzymatic metabolism of CBZE (epoxide hydrolase).
A GLC analysis is presented for loxapine, amoxapine, and their major metabolites in serum and urine. Electron-capture detection is employed for serum analysis, and flame ionization is used for urine analysis. The procedure includes trifluoroacetylation of secondary amine functions, followed by trimethylsilylation of phenolic groups after ethyl acetate extraction of the sample. Urine requires prior enzymatic hydrolysis of conjugates. Data indicating the utility of the procedure in hospitalized patients and normal volunteers are presented.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Loxapine for inhalation is a drug-device combination product approved in adults for the acute treatment of agitation associated with schizophrenia or bipolar I disorder. The primary objective of this study was to develop a clinical trial protocol to support a phase I pharmacokinetic study in children aged 10 years and older. In addition, this report details the results of the clinical study in relation to the predicted likelihood of achieving the target exposure associated with therapeutic effect in adults. METHODS: A nonlinear mixed-effects population pharmacokinetic model was developed using adult data and was adjusted for the targeted pediatric age groups by applying allometric scaling to account for body size effects. Based on this pediatric model, age-appropriate regimens to achieve loxapine exposures similar to the ones associated with therapeutic effect in the adult studies were identified via trial simulation. D-optimal design and power analysis were conducted to identify optimal pharmacokinetic sampling times and sample size, respectively. RESULTS: The developed clinical trial design formed the basis of a phase I study to assess the safety and pharmacokinetics of loxapine for inhalation in children aged 10 years and older (ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT02184767). CONCLUSION: The results of the study indicated that overall loxapine exposures were consistent with what had been predicted by the trial simulations. The presented approach illustrates how modeling and simulation can assist in the design of informative clinical trials to identify safe and effective doses and dose ranges in children and adolescents.
In a parallel groups, double-blind study, 54 acutely psychotic schizophrenics were given loxapine or haloperidol parenterally for 24 to 72 hours, then orally for a total study period of up to 10 days. Dosage ratios of loxapine to haloperidol ranged from a minimum of 2.7:1 to a maximum of 4.4:1. Both groups showed significant and rapid improvement from baseline. Forty-eight percent of the loxapine patients and 33% of the haloperidol patients achieved and maintained a global severity of illness rating of mild or better. By the end of the study, 84% of the loxapine patients and 63% of the haloperidol patients had achieved an improvement rating of moderate or marked. This difference approached significance (p less than .10). The most frequently reported adverse experiences were dystonic reactions and akathisia. The number and severity of adverse experiences did not differ significantly between drug groups. Intramuscular loxapine was at least as effective as haloperidol in the initial management of hostile and aggressive schizophrenic patients. The maintenance of therapeutic response after conversion to oral concentrate was comparable with the two drugs.
BACKGROUND: Loxapine, a first-generation antipsychotic, delivered with a novel inhalation delivery device developed for the acute treatment of agitation in patients with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder was evaluated in subjects with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). METHODS: Separate randomized, double-blind, parallel-arm, placebo-controlled trials compared two administrations of inhaled loxapine (10 mg) 10 hr apart with placebo in 52 subjects with asthma and in 53 subjects with COPD. A thermally-generated drug aerosol of loxapine was delivered to the deep lung for rapid systemic absorption. Controller medications were continued throughout the study, but quick-relief bronchodilators were withheld from 6-8 hr before through 34 hr after dose 1, unless indicated as rescue. RESULTS: All airway adverse events (AEs) were of mild or moderate severity. Symptomatic bronchospasm occurred in 53.8% of subjects with asthma after inhaled loxapine and 11.5% after placebo; and in 19.2% of COPD subjects after inhaled loxapine and 11.1% after placebo. Subjects required inhaled albuterol as follows: asthma: 53.8% after inhaled loxapine and 11.5% after placebo; and COPD: 23.1% after inhaled loxapine and 14.8% after placebo. Respiratory signs/symptoms requiring treatment responded to rescue bronchodilator [forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV(1)) return to within 10% of baseline] within 1 hr in 11 of 15 events in asthma subjects and four of seven events in COPD subjects, the remainder by the last spirometry. CONCLUSIONS: In subjects with either asthma or COPD, FEV(1) decline and bronchospasm can occur following inhaled loxapine, but more frequently in asthmatic subjects. Most subjects with bronchospasm responded to rescue bronchodilator within 1 hr. No treatment-related serious AE occurred. Although inhaled loxapine is contraindicated in patients with active airways disease per the current approved US labeling, these studies demonstrated that rescue bronchodilator mitigated the symptomatic bronchospasms that may occur in case of inadvertent use.
BACKGROUND: The management of acute agitation manifesting in patients with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder requires swift pharmacological intervention to provide rapid symptomatic relief and prevent escalation to aggression and violence. Antipsychotic medications are widely used in this setting and the availability of an inhaled formulation with deep lung absorption of the antipsychotic loxapine has the potential to deliver a faster onset of therapeutic effect than the available intramuscular formulations of antipsychotics. METHODS: The efficacy of inhaled loxapine and the alternative antipsychotic aripiprazole delivered via intramuscular (IM) injection will be compared in the Phase IIIb PLACID study. Adults (18-65 years) with a confirmed diagnosis of schizophrenia or bipolar I disorder presenting with acute agitation will be randomly assigned to open-label treatment in a 1:1 ratio. Clinical evaluation will be conducted by raters blinded to treatment assignment. The primary efficacy endpoint is time to response (defined as a Clinical Global Impression of Improvement [CGI-I] score of 1 [very much improved] or 2 [much improved]). Secondary endpoints will include the percentage of responders at different time points after dosing; the proportion of patients who receive 1 or 2 doses of study drug; time to second dose; time to rescue medication; satisfaction with study drug (evaluated using Item 14 of the Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire for Medication); and safety and tolerability. Approximately 360 patients will be recruited with an interim analysis conducted once 180 patients have completed the study to decide whether to stop for futility or continue with or without an increase in the sample size up to additional 288 patients. DISCUSSION: The PLACID trial will assess the efficacy and safety of inhaled loxapine with deep lung absorption compared with the IM antipsychotic, aripiprazole, in acutely agitated patients with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. In the event that the median time to response of inhaled loxapine is significantly shorter than that of the intramuscular aripiprazole, the PLACID study has the potential to support the inhaled antipsychotic therapy as the standard of care in this setting. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The study protocol was registered with the European Clinical Trials Database on the 31 October 2014 (EudraCT number 2014-000456-29 ).
The intramuscular and oral forms of loxapine succinate were compared in their clinical, side effect, and blood level characteristics in ten hospitalized chronic schizophrenic patients. The first phase of the study determined the single dose that produced moderate sedation (i.e., the sedation threshold), and this dose was essentially the same for the two forms. Continuous administration of the two forms using the individualized sedation threshold dosage also failed to indicate any clinical or side effect differences in the two forms. The blood level characteristics, however, did differ between the two forms. The kinetic studies indicated that there was a larger are under the loxapine curve with the intramuscular form than with the oral form, while the 8-OH loxapine area was larger with the oral form. The steady-state studies also showed that the i.m. form had higher loxapine levels than the oral form. The significance of these findings, both clinically and in terms of the relative activity of loxapine and its metabolites, is discussed.
The aim of the study was to investigate the efficacy and safety of inhaled loxapine compared with the intramuscular (IM) antipsychotic aripiprazole in acutely agitated patients with schizophrenia or bipolar I disorder. PLACID was an assessor-blind, parallel-group trial conducted in 23 centres in the Czech Republic, Germany, Spain, and Russia. Patients (aged 18-65 years) diagnosed with schizophrenia or bipolar I disorder experiencing acute agitation (Clinical Global Impression [CGI]-Severity score >/= 4) while hospitalized or attending an emergency room were randomized to receive up to two doses of inhaled loxapine 9.1 mg or IM aripiprazole 9.75 mg (>/= 2 h between doses) during the 24-h study period. The primary efficacy endpoint was time to response (CGI-Improvement score 1 [very much improved] or 2 [much improved]). The primary analysis included randomized patients who provided informed consent (full analysis set [FAS]); the safety analysis included all patients who received study medication. The FAS comprised 357 patients (enrolled December 2, 2014 - October 31, 2016). The between-treatment difference in median time to CGI-Improvement response was 10 min (95% CI 0.0-30.0); p = 0.0005) in favour of inhaled loxapine (median [95% CI]: 50 min [30.0-50.0] vs 60 min [50.0-90.0] with IM aripiprazole); the difference was significant at 10 min (responders: 14% [loxapine] vs 4% [aripiprazole]; p = 0.001). There were no safety issues. Inhaled loxapine reduced agitation faster than IM aripiprazole, supporting its use as a first-line option for managing acute agitation in patients with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder.
Loxapine is chemically related to clozapine and shares with it and other atypical antipsychotic drugs relatively greater affinity for serotonin (5-HT)2A than for dopamine D2 receptors. However, as is the case for risperidone, the occupancy of 5-HT2A and D2 receptors can range from partial to full, depending upon the dose. It was, therefore, of interest to determine whether loxapine at low doses (< 50 mg/day) might be at least as or more effective and more tolerable than usual clinical doses (> or = 60 mg/day). We retrospectively examined data from 75 patients treated with loxapine and found psychopathology data from 10 and 12 patients treated with low-dose or standard-dose loxapine, respectively. No data were available on the other 53 patients, 28 of whom were initially treated with low-dose and 25 with standard-dose loxapine. For those treated for at least 6 weeks, there was evidence of equivalent efficacy for both low- and standard-dose loxapine with regard to improvement in Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) and Global Assessment Scale scores. There were 6 patients with a history of neuroleptic resistance among the 22 completers. Four of the low-dose group (40%) and 8 of the standard-dose group (67%) had at least a 20% decrease in BPRS total scores. Further study of the dose-response curve for loxapine and its usefulness in treating neuroleptic-resistant schizophrenia is indicated.
1. A g.l.c. method for quantitative determination of loxapine (2-chloro-11-(4-methyl-1-piperazinyl)dibenz(b,f)(1,4)oxazepine), in human plasma and urine is described. 2. Preliminary pharmacokinetic data on plasma concn of loxapine over 12 h from five psychiatric patients who received a total average dose of 80 mg of loxapine succinate per day orally for twelve weeks are presented. 3. In addition to unchanged loxapine, three urinary metabolic products, namely aromatic ring-hydroxy loxapine, desmethyl loxapine and loxapine-N-oxide, were identified using g.l.c.--mass spectrometry.
