BACKGROUND: In early 2016, in Preah Vihear, Northern Cambodia, artesunate/mefloquine was used to cope with dihydroartemisinin/piperaquine-resistant Plasmodium falciparum parasites. Following this policy, P. falciparum strains harbouring molecular markers associated with artemisinin, piperaquine and mefloquine resistance have emerged. However, the lack of a viable alternative led Cambodia to adopt artesunate/mefloquine countrywide, raising concerns about a surge of triple-resistant P. falciparum strains. OBJECTIVES: To assess the prevalence of triple-resistant parasites after artesunate/mefloquine implementation countrywide in Cambodia and to characterize their phenotype. METHODS: For this multicentric study, 846 samples were collected from 2016 to 2019. Genotyping of molecular markers associated with artemisinin, piperaquine and mefloquine resistance was coupled with phenotypic analyses. RESULTS: Only four triple-resistant P. falciparum isolates (0.47%) were identified during the study period. These parasites combined the pfk13 polymorphism with pfmdr1 amplification, pfpm2 amplification and/or pfcrt mutations. They showed significantly higher tolerance to artemisinin, piperaquine and mefloquine and also to the mefloquine and piperaquine combination. CONCLUSIONS: The use of artesunate/mefloquine countrywide in Cambodia has not led to a massive increase of triple-resistant P. falciparum parasites. However, these parasites circulate in the population, and exhibit clear resistance to piperaquine, mefloquine and their combination in vitro. This study demonstrates that P. falciparum can adapt to more complex drug associations, which should be considered in future therapeutic designs.
Here we present the synthesis and evaluation of the biological activity of new hybrid compounds, ureido-type (UT) harmiquins, based on chloroquine (CQ) or mefloquine (MQ) scaffolds and beta-carboline alkaloid harmine against cancer cell lines and Plasmodium falciparum. The hybrids were prepared from the corresponding amines by 1,1'-carbonyldiimidazole (CDI)-mediated synthesis. In vitro evaluation of the biological activity of the title compounds revealed two hit compounds. Testing of the antiproliferative activity of the new UT harmiquins, and previously prepared triazole-(TT) and amide-type (AT) CQ-based harmiquins, against a panel of human cell lines, revealed TT harmiquine 16 as the most promising compound, as it showed pronounced and selective activity against the tumor cell line HepG2 (IC (50) = 5.48 +/- 3.35 mumol L(-1)). Screening of the antiplasmodial activities of UT harmiquins against erythrocytic stages of the Plasmodium life cycle identified CQ-based UT harmiquine 12 as a novel antiplasmodial hit because it displayed low IC (50) values in the submicromolar range against CQ-sensitive and resistant strains (IC (50) 0.06 +/- 0.01, and 0.19 +/- 0.02 mumol L(-1), respectively), and exhibited high selectivity against Plasmodium, compared to mammalian cells (SI = 92).
Background and Introduction: Mefloquine, a drug used to prevent and treat malaria is described possessing activity against the Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) as well as against multidrugresistant tuberculosis (MDR) and other types of bacteria. Despite their importance, few compounds based on the Mefloquine nucleus have been synthesized and evaluated against TB. MATERIALS AND METHODS: For the synthesis of all the compounds based on the Mefloquine nucleus we used a synthetic route which utilized the key derivative 4-methoxy-2,8-bis(trifluoromethyl)quinoline 2 as starting material. The compounds 3 (a-c), 4 (a-b) were synthesized after one step by reaction of 2 with appropriate amines substituted. The chloro derivatives 5 and 6 were obtained from compounds 4b and 4a by treatment with SOCl2 in CH2Cl2 at reflux in 75 and 80% yield, respectively. The analogue 6 was converted to 7 after treatment with ethanolamine under heating at 90oC in 64% yield and to the azido derivative 8 in 56% after reaction with sodium azide in MeOH at reflux for 2 h. The analogue 9 was obtained after reaction of 5 with ethanolamine at 90oC for 1 h in 90% yield. All the new compounds were identified by detailed spectral data, including 1H NMR, 13C NMR and high resolution mass spectra. All the compound were evaluated for their in vitro antibacterial activity against sensitive Mycobacterium tuberculosis ATCC 27294, using the microplate Alamar Blue assay (MABA). The more active compounds 3c, 7, and 9 were also evaluated against resistant strain SR 2571/0215 (resistant to Rifampicin and Isoniazid) by above method. All compounds were tested against three cancer cell lines: SF-295 (glioblastoma), HCT-116 (colon) and PC-3 (prostate) using the MTT assay. RESULTS: All the planned ten compounds were synthetically obtained in good global yield, displaying activity against sensitive Mycobacterium tuberculosis in vitro, with exception of one, with MIC values between 37.2 and 154.8 microM. The compounds 3c (37.2 microM), 7 (68.1 microM) and 9 (65.6 microM) showed the highest activity in this series with MIC values similar when compare to the standard Mefloquine (30 - 60 microM), being 3c the most potent. The more active compounds 3c, 7, and 9 were also evaluated against resistant strain, displaying MIC of 37.2, 136.2 and 65.6 microM, respectively. All compounds were tested against three cancer cell lines and showed low cytotoxicity. CONCLUSION: All synthesized compounds, with the exception of 5, exhibited activity against the Mtb. Compound 3c was the most potent against resistant and sensitive Mtb in this series, with MIC value of 37.2 microM. All compounds showed low cytotoxicity. These findings could be considered a good model to develop possible lead compounds in the fight against TB based on Mefloquine nucleus.
BACKGROUND: It is well known that both mefloquine and doxycycline are commonly associated with adverse effects when taken for malaria chemoprophylaxis. However, the relative impact of these on travelers' ability to work is not so well understood. The aim of this study was to identify which drug has a lesser impact on the ability to work as measured by self-reported severity of adverse effects via a questionnaire. METHODS: This was a questionnaire-based two-arm cohort study. Participants were soldiers selected from 10 consecutive units training in Kenya during 2012 and 2013. The exposure was either doxycycline or mefloquine and the main outcome measure was impact upon ability to work. Each cohort was advised to take doxycycline or mefloquine with exceptions at the individual level where medically or occupationally advised. RESULTS: Significantly more (p < 0.0001) doxycycline users reported that one or more adverse effects had interfered with their ability to do their job than mefloquine users. Of the 867 mefloquine users, who reported on the impact of adverse effects, 109 (12.6%) reported that one or more adverse effects had impacted upon their ability to do their job, compared to 152 (22.2%) of the 685 doxycycline users who had reported on the impact of any adverse effects. Doxycycline symptoms were predominantly gastrointestinal and dermatological, whereas mefloquine symptoms were neuropsychiatric. CONCLUSIONS: Self-reported symptoms were common in those that responded and, while the true background rate of adverse effects (off any medication) is unknown, doxycycline had a significantly increased rate compared with mefloquine and was associated with a greater occupational impact. Therefore, this study supports the view that, for organizations which provide malaria chemoprophylaxis to employees free of charge, mefloquine should be the first-choice antimalarial drug where the only alternative is doxycycline.
INTRODUCTION: To evaluate the associations between neurocognitive and psychiatric health outcomes with mefloquine or any antimalarial exposure. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Medical records were systematically reviewed to identify veterans that indicated antimalarial medication use. Linear regression was performed to examine associations between mefloquine/antimalarial exposure and health outcomes. The mefloquine-exposed group was further compared with normative populations for the same health outcomes. RESULTS: In the adjusted models, no significant differences were noted between the two exposure groups and the unexposed group for any of the health measures (P-value > 0.05). When compared to normative population samples, the mefloquine-exposed group had poorer health and greater neurobehavioral symptom severity or cognitive complaints. CONCLUSION: This study suggests that mefloquine use by veterans referred for intensive evaluation of their military deployment exposures and health was not associated with increased, long-term, neurocognitive/psychiatric symptoms compared to unexposed veterans.
BACKGROUND: Mpox virus (MPXV) is a zoonotic orthopoxvirus and caused an outbreak in 2022. Although tecovirimat and brincidofovir are approved as anti-smallpox drugs, their effects in mpox patients have not been well documented. In this study, by a drug repurposing approach, we identified potential drug candidates for treating mpox and predicted their clinical impacts by mathematical modeling. METHODS: We screened 132 approved drugs using an MPXV infection cell system. We quantified antiviral activities of potential drug candidates by measuring intracellular viral DNA and analyzed the modes of action by time-of-addition assay and electron microscopic analysis. We further predicted the efficacy of drugs under clinical concentrations by mathematical simulation and examined combination treatment. RESULTS: Atovaquone, mefloquine, and molnupiravir exhibited anti-MPXV activity, with 50% inhibitory concentrations of 0.51-5.2 muM, which was more potent than cidofovir. Whereas mefloquine was suggested to inhibit viral entry, atovaquone and molnupiravir targeted postentry processes. Atovaquone was suggested to exert its activity through inhibiting dihydroorotate dehydrogenase. Combining atovaquone with tecovirimat enhanced the anti-MPXV effect of tecovirimat. Quantitative mathematical simulations predicted that atovaquone can promote viral clearance in patients by 7 days at clinically relevant drug concentrations. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that atovaquone would be a potential candidate for treating mpox.
BACKGROUND: Declining in susceptibility of Plasmodium falciparum to mefloquine is reported in South-East Asia. A revisiting on mefloquine pharmacokinetics-pharmacodynamics (PK/PD) could assist in finding new appropriate dosage regimens in combination with artesunate as a three-day course treatment. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate promising alternative artesunate-mefloquine combination regimens that are effective for the treatment of patients with mefloquine-sensitive and resistant P. falciparum malaria. METHODS: Data collected during 2008-2009 from 124 patients with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria were included in the analysis, 90 and 34 patients with sensitive and recrudescence response, respectively. All patients were treated with a three-day combination of artesunate-mefloquine. Population PK-PD models were developed. The developed models were validated with clinically observed data. Simulations of clinical efficacy of alternative mefloquine regimens were performed based on mefloquine sensitivity, patients' adherence and parasite biomass. RESULTS: The developed PK/PD models well described with clinically observed data. For mefloquine-resistant P. falciparum, a three-day standard regimen of artesunate-mefloquine is suitable (>50% efficacy) only when the level of parasite sensitivity was < 1.5-fold of the cut-off level (IC50 < 36 nM). For mefloquine-sensitive parasite with IC50 < 23.19 nM (0.96-fold), all regimens provided satisfactory efficacy. In the isolates with IC50 of 24 nM, regimen-I is recommended. Curative treatment criteria for mefloquine and artesunate were C336h (>408 ng.mL-1) or Cmax/IC50 (>130.1 g.m/M), and Cmax/IC50 (>381.2 g.m/M), respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Clinical use of a three-day standard artesunate-mefloquine is suitable only when the IC50 of P. falciparum isolates is lower than 36 nM. Otherwise, other ACT regimens should be replaced. For mefloquine-sensitive parasite, a dose reduction is recommended with the IC50 is lower than 23.19 nM.
Malaria is an infectious disease that is caused by different species of Plasmodium. Several antimalarial drugs are used to counter the spread and infectivity of Plasmodium species. However, humans are also vulnerable to many of the antimalarial drugs, including the quinoline-based drugs. In particular, the antimalarial mefloquine has been reported to show adverse neuropsychiatric effects in humans. Though mefloquine is known to be neurotoxic, the molecular mechanisms associated with this phenomenon are still obscure. In this study, we show that mefloquine binds to and inactivates the human acyl-CoA binding protein (hACBP), potentially inducing redox stress in human neuroblastoma cells (IMR-32). Mefloquine occupies the acyl-CoA binding pocket of hACBP by interacting with several of the critical acyl-CoA binding amino acids. This leads to the competitive inhibition of acyl-CoA(s) binding to hACBP and to the accumulation of lipid droplets inside the IMR-32 cells. The accumulation of cytosolic lipid globules and oxidative stress finally correlates with the apoptotic death of cells. Taken together, our study deciphers a mechanistic detail of how mefloquine leads to the death of human cells by perturbing the activity of hACBP and lipid homeostasis.
Mefloquine shows a high capacity to bind plasma proteins, which influences the amount of drug in erythrocytes. The study investigated the association of lipids levels with plasma concentrations of mefloquine and carboxy-mefloquine in 85 Brazilian patients with uncomplicated falciparum malaria. There were no significant associations between the total cholesterol or triglycerides with plasma concentrations of mefloquine and of carboxy-mefloquine. Lipoprotein levels explained 25.68% and 18.31% of mefloquine and carboxy-mefloquine plasma concentrations, respectively.
The interaction between mefloquine (MEF), the antimalarial drug, and human serum albumin (HSA), the main carrier protein in blood circulation, was explored using fluorescence, absorption, and circular dichroism spectroscopic techniques. Quenching of HSA fluorescence with MEF was characterized as static quenching and thus confirmed the complex formation between MEF and HSA. Association constant values for MEF-HSA interaction were found to fall within the range of 3.79-5.73 x 10(4)  M(-1) at various temperatures (288, 298, and 308 K), which revealed moderate binding affinity. Hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions were predicted to connect MEF and HSA together in the MEF-HSA complex, as deduced from the thermodynamic data (DeltaS = +133.52 J mol(-1) K(-1) and DeltaH = +13.09 kJ mol(-1) ) of the binding reaction and molecular docking analysis. Three-dimensional fluorescence spectral analysis pointed out alterations in the microenvironment around aromatic amino acid (tryptophan and tyrosine) residues of HSA consequent to the addition of MEF. Circular dichroic spectra of HSA in the wavelength ranges of 200-250 and 250-300 nm hinted smaller changes in the protein's secondary and tertiary structures, respectively, induced by MEF binding. Noncovalent conjugation of MEF to HSA bettered protein thermostability. Site marker competitive drug displacement results suggested HSA Sudlow's site I as the MEF binding site, which was also supported by molecular docking analysis.
