BACKGROUND: This is an updated version of a previously published review in The Cochrane Library (2005, Issue 2) on 'Megestrol acetate for the treatment of anorexia-cachexia syndrome'. Megestrol acetate (MA) is currently used to improve appetite and to increase weight in cancer-associated anorexia. In 1993, MA was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of anorexia, cachexia or unexplained weight loss in patients with AIDS. The mechanism by which MA increases appetite is unknown and its effectiveness for anorexia and cachexia in neoplastic and AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) patients is under investigation. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy, effectiveness and safety of MA in palliating anorexia-cachexia syndrome in patients with cancer, AIDS and other underlying pathologies. SEARCH METHODS: We sought studies through an extensive search of electronic databases, journals, reference lists, contact with investigators and other search strategies outlined in the methods. The most recent search for this update was carried out in May 2012. SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included in the review if they assessed MA compared to placebo or other drug treatments in randomised controlled trials of patients with a clinical diagnosis of anorexia-cachexia syndrome related to cancer, AIDS or any other underlying pathology. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two independent review authors conducted data extraction and evaluated methodological quality. We performed quantitative analyses using appetite and quality of life as a dichotomous variable, and analysed weight gain as continuous and dichotomous variables. MAIN RESULTS: We included 35 trials in this update, the same number but not the same trials as in the previous version of the review. The trials comprised 3963 patients for effectiveness and 3180 for safety. Sixteen trials compared MA at different doses with placebo, seven trials compared different doses of MA with other drug treatments and 10 trials compared different doses of MA. Meta-analysis showed a benefit of MA compared with placebo, particularly with regard to appetite improvement and weight gain in cancer, AIDS and other underlying conditions, and lack of benefit in the same patients when MA was compared to other drugs. There was insufficient information to define the optimal dose of MA, but higher doses were more related to weight improvement than lower doses. Quality of life improvement in patients was seen only when comparing MA versus placebo but not other drugs in both subcategories: cancer and AIDS. Oedema, thromboembolic phenomena and deaths were more frequent in the patients treated with MA. More than 40 side effects were studied. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This review shows that MA improves appetite and is associated with slight weight gain in cancer, AIDS and in patients with other underlying pathology. Despite the fact that these patients are receiving palliative care they should be informed of the risks involved in taking MA.
We present a case report of adrenal insufficiency and testicular failure in an adult cystic fibrosis (CF) patient due to megestrol acetate therapy. This is followed by a review of the literature on the use of megestrol acetate in the treatment of weight loss in CF, AIDS, and cancer, with particular emphasis on the adverse effects that should be looked for in CF patients.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and safety of oral megestrol acetate (MA) in the management of protein-energy wasting in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). DESIGN: A systematic review of English published literature from 1970 until April 1, 2014. SUBJECTS: All adult patients with CKD including both dialysis and non-dialysis-dependent. INTERVENTION: Oral MA. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Efficacy outcomes included changes in body weight, serum albumin, and appetite. Safety outcomes examined included adverse events (AEs) and deaths. RESULTS: A total of 9 studies met the inclusion criteria. No data on MA in non-dialysis CKD patients were available. Statistically significant increases in body weight (range 1.5-5 kg) were reported in 6 trials. Statistically significant increases in albumin (range of 0.22 g/dL-0.52 g/dL) were observed in 5 trials. Improved appetite was observed in 7 trials. All trials were limited by small sample sizes (range 9-32 subjects), short duration (range 8-24 weeks), a high degree of bias, and absence of clinical outcomes such as quality of life or hospitalizations. Forty-seven AEs were reported and included overhydration/excessive fluid gain, diarrhea, hyperglycemia, excessive weight gain, suppressed cortisol levels, thrombophlebitis, nausea/vomiting, confusion/hallucinations, vaginal bleeding, headache/dizziness, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase. There were 26 discontinuations due to death. CONCLUSION: The current evidence for treatment with MA in patients receiving dialysis is sparse with few high-quality trials. The safety of using MA beyond 24 weeks is unknown, and use of MA is associated with significant AEs. At this time, oral MA should be used with significant caution, and only when other treatment options are unavailable.
No. Megestrol acetate (MA) is neither safe nor effective for stimulating appetite in malnourished nursing home residents. It increases the risk of deep vein thrombosis (strength of recommendation [SOR]: C, 2 retrospective chart reviews), but isn't associated with other new or worsening events or disorders (SOR: B, single randomized controlled trial [RCT]). Over a 25-week period, MA wasn't associated with increased mortality (SOR: B, single RCT). After 44 months, however, MA-treated patients showed decreased median survival (SOR: B, single case-control study). Consistent, meaningful weight gain was not observed with MA treatment (SOR: B, single case-control study, single RCT, 2 retrospective chart reviews, single prospective case-series).
This case describes the first report of a patient developing Cushing's syndrome whilst being treated with the synthetic progestogen, megestrol acetate (Megace). Drugs are the commonest cause of Cushing's syndrome. Some synthetic progestogens are known to have glucocorticoid activity at high doses. On structural grounds neither megestrol nor its major metabolites would be expected to interact with the glucocorticoid receptor, through the manufacturers report that it may have 'weak glucocorticoid activity'.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the response, toxicities, and progression free survival of a regimen of temsirolimus with or without hormonal therapy in the treatment of advanced, or recurrent endometrial carcinoma. BACKGROUND: Preclinical evidence suggested that blockade of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway might overcome resistance to hormonal therapy. METHODS: We performed a randomized phase II trial of intravenous temsirolimus 25mg weekly versus the combination of weekly temsirolimus with a regimen of megestrol acetate 80 mg bid for three weeks alternating with tamoxifen 20mg bid for three weeks in women with recurrent or metastatic endometrial carcinoma. RESULTS: There were 71 eligible patients who received at least one dose of therapy with 21 of these treated on the combination arm which was closed early because of an excess of venous thrombosis, with 5 episodes of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and 2 pulmonary emboli. There were three responses observed in that arm (14%). A total of 50 eligible patients were treated on the single agent arm with 3 episodes of DVT and 11 responses (22%). Response rates were similar in patients with prior chemotherapy (7 of 29; 24%) and those with no prior chemotherapy (4 of 21; 19%). Two of four patients with clear cell carcinoma responded. CONCLUSIONS: Adding the combination of megestrol acetate and tamoxifen to temsirolimus therapy did not enhance activity and the combination was associated with an excess of venous thrombosis. Temsirolimus activity was preserved in patients with prior adjuvant chemotherapy.
BACKGROUND: Endometrial adenocarcinoma (EC) is the fifth most common cancer in women worldwide, standard treatment for EC includes hysterectomy, but it results in the loss of reproductive function. Thus, conservative treatment for these patients is strongly demanded, progestin therapy is widely accepted as the main fertility-sparing treatment for young women with endometrial hyperplasia with atypia (EHA) and well-differentiated endometrioid endometrial cancer. This trial will investigate the effectiveness of conservative treatment for obese women with early-stage EC. METHOD AND DESIGN: This will be an open-label, 2-armed, randomized, phase-II single-center trial of LNG-IUD plus metformin or megestrol acetate (MA) plus metformin. A total of 88 participants will be randomly assigned into 2 treatment arms in a 1:1 ratio. Clinical, laboratory, ultrasound and radiology data, will be collected at baseline, and then at 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, and 24 months. EC biomarkers will be collected at baseline. The primary aim is to determine the efficacy of a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device (LNG-IUD) plus metformin, or megestrol acetate (MA) plus metformin in achieving pathological complete response (pCR) at 12 months, as well as post-treatment pregnancy outcomes and recurrence rate. The secondary aims are to predict the response to an LNG-IUD plus metformin and MA plus metformin via clinical, blood, and tissue predictive biomarkers. CONCLUSIONS: Prospective evidence for conservative treatment of EC is limited. New methods to achieve better CR rates with fewer side effects are needed. This trial will investigate the effectiveness of LNG-IUD plus metformin, and MA plus metformin, in obese women with early-stage EC, providing a non-surgical treatment option for these patients. Trial registration ChiCTR2200055624. The trial was registered at http://www.chictr.org.cn/listbycreater.aspx on January 15, 2022.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of in vivo endometrial estrogen and progesterone receptor induction as a result of tamoxifen exposure in a postmenopausal breast cancer patient. The following observations, that the postmenopausal endometrium is sensitive to tamoxifen, that this agent can act as an estrogen-like substance, and that it may cause proliferation of the endometrium in the absence of progestin, may explain the endometrial decidual changes described herein as a protective mechanism against possible neoplastic endometrial changes.
AIM: To compare the effects of tamoxifen and megestrol acetate on liver proteins, androgens, and glucocorticoids during adjuvant treatment for postmenopausal breast cancer. METHODS: A subgroup of women within a large prospective multicenter trial were followed with blood sampling every 3 mo during 2 yr. Women were randomized to receive either continuous tamoxifen 40 mg/d or repeated sequential treatment with tamoxifen and megestrol acetate (MA) 160 mg/d. RESULTS: We found profound and distinct differences between the two regimens. Tamoxifen increased steroid-binding proteins (SHBG and CBG) and suppressed circulating androgens and IGF-I. In contrast, the metabolic effects of tamoxifen were clearly antagonized by MA. There was a rise in IGF-I and marked suppression of steroid-binding proteins. Levels of free testosterone were reduced by 70%. MA also caused apparent adrenal suppression. CONCLUSION: The different effects on anabolic/catabolic balance and adrenal function may relate to certain clinical effects during treatment.
Sporadic single case reports linking glucocorticoidlike activity to megestrol acetate have been reported in the literature. These findings have important implications for patient care. Adverse drug experience reports to the US Food and Drug Administration from 1984 through 1996 and a MEDLINE search of the literature from 1984 through 1996 provided the case reports. Five cases of Cushing syndrome, 12 cases of new-onset diabetes, and 16 cases of adrenal insufficiency were identified in association with megestrol therapy. Twelve cases in which preexisting diabetes was exacerbated and 17 cases of possible adrenal insufficiency were identified. Therapy with megestrol can result in clinical manifestations of glucocorticoidlike activity, including Cushing syndrome, diabetes, and adrenal insufficiency. Clinicians need to be aware of this association as these complications can be life-threatening if not recognized.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy of metformin in megestrol acetate (MA)-based fertility-sparing treatment for patients with atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH) and endometrioid endometrial cancer (EEC). DESIGN: A randomised, single-centre, open-label, controlled trial conducted between October 2013 and December 2017. SETTING: Shanghai OBGYN Hospital of Fudan University, China. POPULATION: A total of 150 patients (18-45 years old) with primary AEH or well-differentiated EEC were randomised into an MA group (n = 74) and an MA plus metformin group (n = 76). METHODS: Patients with AEH or EEC were firstly stratified, then randomised to receive MA (160 mg orally, daily) or MA (160 mg orally, daily) plus metformin (500 mg orally, three times a day). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary efficacy parameter was the cumulate complete response (CR) rate within 16 weeks of treatment (16w-CR rate); the secondary efficacy parameters were 30w-CR rate and adverse events. RESULTS: The 16w-CR rate was higher in the metformin plus MA group than in the MA-only group (34.3 versus 20.7%, odds ratio [OR] 2.0, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.89-4.51, P = 0.09) but the difference was more significant in 102 AEH patients (39.6 versus 20.4%, OR 2.56, 95% CI 1.06-6.21, P = 0.04). This effect of metformin was also significant in non-obese (51.4 versus 24.3%, OR 3.28, 95% CI 1.22-8.84, P = 0.02) and insulin-sensitive (54.8 versus 28.6%, OR 3.04, 95% CI 1.03-8.97, P = 0.04) subgroups of AEH women. No significant result was found in secondary endpoints. CONCLUSION: As a fertility-sparing treatment, metformin plus MA was associated with a higher early CR rate compared with MA alone in AEH patients. TWEETABLE ABSTRACT: For AEH patients, metformin plus MA might be a better fertility-sparing treatment to achieve a higher early CR rate compared with MA alone.
PURPOSE: Preclinical data indicate that progestational agents (progesterone, medroxyprogesterone acetate and megestrol acetate) interact with p-glycoprotein (P-gp) and reverse P-gp-associated resistance to vinca alkaloids and other natural products. Based on these data, we performed a phase I study of high-dose oral megestrol acetate and vinblastine to evaluate the safety of this regimen. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Enrolled in the study were 61 patients with advanced solid tumors, refractory to standard therapy. Cohorts of patients received megestrol acetate according to the following escalation scheme (loading dose/maintenance dose, twice daily for 7 days): 750 mg/250 mg, 750 mg/375 mg, 1000 mg/500 mg, 1500 mg/1000 mg, 3000 mg/2000 mg, 4500 mg/3000 mg, 6000 mg/4000 mg, and 7500 mg/5000 mg. They also received 1.5 mg/m(2) per day of vinblastine by continuous infusion for 5 days (days 2 to 6). RESULTS: Of the 61 patients, 59 were evaluable for toxicity. A maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was not reached. The regimen was well tolerated. Of the 59 patients, 10 (17%) experienced grade 4 leukopenia. All of these cases were at dose levels 3 to 8. There was an increase in the steady-state concentration (Css) of megestrol acetate with increasing dose up to the sixth dose level. Further increases in the dose produced no change in the megestrol acetate Css. Only 2.4% of megestrol acetate was free in the plasma as compared to 65.6% in RPMI culture medium. Megestrol acetate administration was associated with profound suppression of ACTH and cortisol levels. CONCLUSIONS: The combination of vinblastine and megestrol acetate was well tolerated. An MTD for this combination was not achieved as a result of the saturable absorption of megestrol acetate. Although potentially therapeutic serum concentrations of megestrol acetate were achieved, it is unlikely that MDR was reversed given the high protein-binding of the drug. Profound suppression of the pituitary-adrenal axis was also observed during the administration of megestrol acetate.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cancer cachexia (CC) syndrome and anorexia-cachexia syndrome are common terms used to describe changes in metabolism with increased inflammatory activity and can progressively develop through various stages such as pre-cachexia; cachexia; and refractory cachexia. Therefore in year 2007 Croatian guidelines for use of eicosapentaenoic acid and megestrol acetate in cancer cachexia syndrome were published. Aim of this study was to assess the awareness and implementation of Croatian guidelines for use of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and megestrol acetate (MA) into clinical practice among Croatian oncologists approximately 10 years after the publication, but also to point out the importance of adequate recognition and treatment of CC. METHODS: Survey with questions was designed to assess the awareness and implementation of Croatian guidelines for use of EPA and MA into clinical practice and was distributed among all Croatian oncologists in secondary and tertiary hospital centers. Survey was conducted in January 2011 (40 months following release of the guidelines), February 2013 and June 2018, and were formed in a way of yes/no answers. Additional multiple choice questions that focus on the implementation of guidelines were added in June 2018. RESULTS: A total of 128 oncologists completed a questionnaire. There was no statistically significant difference in follow up period (2011-2018) of percentage of oncologists that are familiar with Croatian guidelines for use of EPA and MA in CC, percentage of oncologists in which Croatian national guidelines changed their approach in treating patients with CC syndrome and proportion of oncologists that are using MA, enteral nutrition formulas with EPA or their combination. Most of the oncologists 38% (N = 44) are using >2.2 g of EPA per day. Nutritional support is prescribed in 25-50% of patients by 42% (N = 48) of oncologists and most of the oncologists (35%, N = 41) start with nutritional support when a body mass loss is >5%. Oncologists mostly recommend patients to use nutritional support during 1 year or more (43%, N = 49) or two months to 1 year (42%, N = 48). Compliance of patients with malignant diseases for using nutritional support was mostly evaluated as medium (69%, N = 60). CONCLUSIONS: Results have shown that majority of oncologists who filled the questionnaire believe that the Croatian national guidelines for use of EPA and MA in CC syndrome changed their approach in treating patients with CC, but also that there are several targeted issues that can be significantly improved. The awareness of and adherence to national guidelines was maintained at high level even 11 years after the guidelines were published.
BACKGROUND: Megestrol acetate (MA) is an appetite stimulant with efficacy in promoting weight gain in adults with cancer-associated anorexia-cachexia. Studies documenting MA efficacy in children, however, are limited. We present the first randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial of MA versus placebo in children with cancer and weight loss. METHODS: Subjects <18 years of age with weight loss (minimum 5% from highest previous weight; or %ideal body weight <90%) due to cancer and/or cancer therapy were randomized to either MA (7.5 mg/kg/day) or placebo for a planned study duration of 90 days. Primary outcome was the difference between groups in mean percent weight change from beginning to end of the study period. Secondary outcomes included effects on anthropometrics, body composition, need for tube feeding or parenteral nutrition, and toxicities. RESULTS: Twenty-six patients were randomly assigned (13 MA, 13 placebo). The MA group experienced a mean weight gain of +19.7% compared to a mean weight loss of -1.2% in the placebo group, for a difference of +20.9% (95%CI: +11.3% to +30.5%, P = 0.003) in favor of MA over placebo. MA subjects experienced significant increases in weight for age z-scores, body mass index z-scores, and mid upper arm circumference compared to placebo. DXA scanning suggested disproportionate increases in fat accrual. Adrenal suppression was the main toxicity of MA. CONCLUSION: In children with high-risk malignancies, MA resulted in significant increases in mean percent weight change compared to placebo. Further studies of MA should be pursued to better delineate the effect on nutritional status.
OBJECTIVE: Rapamycin analogs have reproducible but modest efficacy in endometrial cancer (EC). Identification of molecular biomarkers that predict benefit could guide clinical development. METHODS: Fixed primary tissue and whole blood were collected prospectively from patients enrolled on GOG 248. DNA was isolated from macro-dissected tumors and blood; next-generation sequence analysis was performed on a panel of cancer related genes. Associations between clinical outcomes [response rate (RR) 20%; progression-free survival (PFS) median 4.9months] and mutations (PTEN, PIK3CA, PIK3R1, KRAS, CTNNB1, AKT1, TSC1, TSC2, NF1, FBXW7) were explored. RESULTS: Sequencing data was obtained from tumors of 55 of the 73 enrolled pts. Mutation rates were consistent with published reports: mutations in PTEN (45%), PIK3CA (29%), PIK3R1 (24%), K-RAS (16%), CTNNB1 (18%) were common and mutations in AKT1 (4%), TSC1 (2%), TSC2 (2%), NF1 (9%) and FBXW7 (4%) were less common. Increased PFS (HR 0.16; 95% CI 0.01-0.78) and RR (response difference 0.83; 95% CI 0.03-0.99) were noted for AKT1 mutation. An increase in PFS (HR 0.46; 95% CI 0.20-0.97) but not RR (response difference 0.00, 95% CI -0.34-0.34) was identified for CTNNB1 mutation. Both patients with TSC mutations had an objective response. There were no statistically significant associations between mutations in PIK3CA, PTEN, PIK3R1, or KRAS and PFS or RR. CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in AKT1, TSC1 and TSC2 are rare, but may predict clinical benefit from temsirolimus. CTNNB1 mutations were associated with longer PFS on temsirolimus.
Megestrol acetate (MA) (Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Princeton, NJ) increases weight gain in AIDS and cancer patients and in age-related cachexia; however, the weight gain is predominately fat. We determined if adding resistance exercise and/or testosterone (T) replacement to MA administration would result in a more favorable body composition change than MA alone. Thirty older men (aged 67.0 +/- 5.8) completed this 12-wk study. All subjects received MA and were randomly assigned to one of the following groups: placebo (P) injections, resistance training (RT) and P (RT + P), weekly injections of T (100 mg/wk) or, RT and T (RT + T). The mean increase in body weight for all groups combined was 3.8 kg (P < 0.0001), but this increase was not different between groups. There was a significant interaction for the change in thigh muscle cross-sectional area (P = 0.0006). Thigh muscle cross-sectional area was significantly reduced from baseline by 5.20 [1.62] cm(2) (P = 0.05) in P which was not prevented in T [-4.44 (1.66) cm(2) from baseline; P = 0.04]. RT prevented this decline [+0.61 (1.41) cm(2) from baseline]. Muscle cross-sectional area increased 4.51 (1.69) cm(2) from baseline in RT + T (P = 0.002 vs. P and P = 0.002 vs. T). Despite significant weight gain, MA appears to have an antianabolic effect on muscle size even when combined with T replacement. Resistance exercise attenuated this reduction in muscle mass and when combined with T had an anabolic effect on muscle mass.
