Objective: Description of melphalan's toxicity in retinoblastoma treatment. Methods: Clinical case report. Results: We presented a case of unilateral retinoblastoma with vitreous seeding at diagnosis, in which the use of intravitreal melphalan produced many adverse reactions. Conclusions: Vitreous seedings have been one of the most important challenges in retinoblastoma treatment. Intravitreal melphalan has achieved the regression of vitreous seedings in a large percentage of cases. It is a safe treatment; however, it can produce toxicity, even with the standard dose of 20-30 microg, which has been poorly documented. Exhaustive follow-up of patients is recommended for an early diagnosis of possible adverse effects. Abbreviations: OS = left eye, RI = magnetic resonance imaging, OCT = optical coherence tomography.
Objective improvement after therapy with melphalan occurred in all patients producing only Bence Jones kappa proteins, in half of the patients with myeloma serum proteins, and in none of those producing only Bence Jones lambda proteins.
Melphalan, has been a major component of myeloma therapy since the 1950s. In the context of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT), high dose melphalan (HDM) is the most common conditioning regimen used due to its potent anti-myeloma effects and manageable toxicities. Common toxicities associated with HDM include myelosuppression, gastrointestinal issues, and mucositis. Established approaches to reduce these toxicities encompass dose modification, nausea prophylaxis with 5HT3 receptor antagonists, cryotherapy, amifostine use, and growth factors. Optimization of melphalan exposure through personalized dosing and its combination with other agents like busulfan, or bendamustine show promise. Propylene glycol-free melphalan (Evomela) represents a novel formulation aiming to enhance drug stability and reduce adverse effects. This review explores strategies to enhance the efficacy and mitigate the toxicity of HDM in multiple myeloma. Future directions involve exploring these strategies in clinical trials to improve the safety and efficacy of HDM, thereby enhancing outcomes for multiple myeloma patients undergoing autologous HCT.
Cryotherapy is a conventional method for preventing melphalan-induced oral mucositis (OM) in adult patients. We retrospectively examined the clinical benefits of cryotherapy in 41 pediatric patients undergoing autologous stem cell transplantation using a melphalan-etoposide-carboplatin regimen. Twenty-two patients received cryotherapy. The cumulative incidence of grade 3-4 OM was significantly lower in the cryotherapy group (57.1%) than in the noncryotherapy group (89.5%; P = .041). Multivariate analyses identified cryotherapy and the melphalan dose as independent factors for the lower occurrence of OM. The present study demonstrates the clinically significant efficacy of cryotherapy for preventing melphalan-induced OM in pediatric patients.
Melphalan flufenamide (melflufen, Pepaxto((R))) is a peptide conjugated alkylating drug developed by Oncopeptides for the treatment of multiple myeloma (MM) and amyloid light-chain amyloidosis. It is an ethyl ester of a lipophilic dipeptide consisting of melphalan and para-fluoro-L-phenylalanine. Due to its lipophilicity, melphalan flufenamide is rapidly transported across the cell membrane and almost immediately hydrolyzed by aminopeptidases in the cytoplasm to yield more hydrophilic alkylating molecules, such as melphalan and desethyl-melflufen. Like other nitrogen mustard drugs, melphalan flufenamide exerts antitumor activity through DNA crosslinking. In February 2021, melphalan flufenamide, in combination with dexamethasone, received its first approval in the USA for the treatment of adults with relapsed or refractory (r/r) MM who have received at least four prior lines of therapy and whose disease is refractory to at least one proteasome inhibitor (PI), one immunomodulatory agent, and one CD38-directed monoclonal antibody. A multinational clinical study of melphalan flufenamide in amyloid light-chain amyloidosis is underway across several countries, and preclinical studies for various haematological and solid cancers are underway. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of melphalan flufenamide leading to this first approval.
