Mebutamate, a propanediol derivative, has recently been introduced as an antihypertensive agent. In a double-blind, controlled study of 33 patients, the antihypertensive effect of mebutamate was not found to differ significantly from that of a placebo.The psychosedative properties of mebutamate did not differ from those of meprobamate. Reserpine, when given orally, lowered blood pressure and its antihypertensive activity was independent of its sedative properties.
Carisoprodol is a therapeutic and occasionally abused centrally acting muscle relaxant. We compare central blood and liver concentrations of carisoprodol and the metabolite meprobamate to concentrations in peripheral blood in 11 medical examiner cases. Specimens were initially screened for alcohol and simple volatiles by gas chromatography (GC)-flame ionization detection headspace analysis, enzyme-linked immunosorbent array for drugs of abuse, and therapeutic drugs by GC-mass spectrometry (MS). Carisoprodol, when detected by the therapeutic drug screen, was confirmed and quantified by a specific GC-MS procedure. The results suggest that when ingested with other medications, carisoprodol may be a contributing factor in death, even when present at therapeutic concentrations. Considering the cases studied, together with previously published therapeutic and fatal concentrations, blood carisoprodol concentrations greater than 15 mg/L and liver concentrations greater than 50 mg/kg may be considered excessive and potentially fatal. Carisoprodol central blood to peripheral blood ratios averaged 1.31 + 0.33 (mean +/- standard deviation), and liver to peripheral blood, 2.83 +/- 1.51. Meprobamate central blood to peripheral blood ratios averaged 0.92 +/- 0.22, and liver to peripheral blood, 1.25 +/- 0.69. The low liver to peripheral blood ratio (less than 5), taken together with the low central blood to peripheral blood ratio, is an indicator that both carisoprodol and meprobamate lack the potential to exhibit postmortem redistribution.
Carisoprodol and meprobamate are centrally acting muscle relaxant/anxiolytic drugs that can exist in a parent-metabolite relationship (carisoprodol --> meprobamate) or as a separate pharmaceutical preparation (meprobamate aka Equanil, others). The monitoring of the use of these drugs has both clinical and forensic applications in pain management applications and in overdose situations. LC-MS/MS is used to analyze urine or plasma/serum extracts with deuterated analogs of each analyte as internal standards to ensure accurate quantitation and control for any potential matrix effects. Positive ion electrospray is used to introduce the analytes into the mass spectrometer. Selected reaction monitoring of two product ions for each analyte allows for the calculation of ion ratios which ensures correct identification of each analyte, while a matrix-matched calibration curve is used for quantitation.
In 2013, the National Safety Council's Alcohol Drugs and Impairment Division added zolpidem and carisoprodol and its metabolite meprobamate to the list of Tier 1 drugs that should be tested for in all suspected drug impaired driving and motor vehicle fatality investigations. We describe the validation of an enzyme linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) for both drugs in whole blood, and the utilization of the ELISA to assess their positivity in a sample of 322 suspected impaired driving cases that was retrospectively screened using the validated assays. The occurrence of carisoprodol/meprobamate was found to be 1.2%, and for zolpidem, 1.6%. In addition, we analyzed a large dataset (n = 1,672) of Driving Under the Influence of Drugs (DUID) test results from a laboratory performing high volume DUID testing to assess the frequency of detection of both drugs after implementing the expanded NSC scope. Carisoprodol or meprobamate were found positive in 5.9% (n = 99) of these samples, while zolpidem was found positive in 5.3% (n = 89) in drivers who in many cases had been found to be negative for other drugs. Carisoprodol and zolpidem are both potent CNS depressants and are appropriate additions to the recommended NSC scope of testing.
The following case study demonstrates the important influence of diazepam and meprobamate on a patient's neuropsychological test performance. This article includes: a brief medical history and summary of previous physical examinations; brief description of the neuropsychological test battery; formulation of the original neuropsychological test findings; follow-up neuropsychological testing; and discussion. The profound interaction effect of these prescribed drugs revealed severe cognitive, memory, and motor function deficits in a 53-year-old male. These findings are in contrast to reports in the literature.
Implementation of regulations to control the prescribing of benzodiazepines in New York State in 1989 resulted in a 55% decrease in benzodiazepine prescribing, with a concomitant increase in the rates of prescribing older sedative-hypnotic compounds such as butabarbital (30% increase) and meprobamate (125% increase). In a double-blind, crossover, placebo-controlled study, we compared the behavioral and pharmacological effects of triazolam, meprobamate, and butabarbital in 14 recreational drug users. Placebo and three doses each of triazolam, meprobamate, and butabarbital were administered to each subject in a random order. Objective tests (motor performance, concentration) and subjective response questionnaires measured drug effects. Triazolam, meprobamate, and butabarbital showed comparable negative dose-response slopes on the objective measures. On the basis of these objective data, equivalent doses for the three compounds were determined to be as follows: 0.5 mg triazolam = 2,400 mg meprobamate = 400 mg butabarbital. Subjective effects data on equivalent doses show that butabarbital produced the highest peak score on Cole/ARCI Abuse Potential, ARCI Pentobarbital Chlorpromazine Alcohol Group (PCAG), and "drug strength" scales. Triazolam and butabarbital produced equivalent results on ARCI Morphine Benzedrine Group (MBG), Cole/ARCI Euphoria, and "drug liking" scales. Meprobamate was indistinguishable from placebo on euphoria and abuse potential scales. Behavioral economics analysis indicated a price crossover point two times higher for butabarbital (400 mg) than for any other drug condition. These data indicate a comparative abuse liability of butabarbital > triazolam > or = meprobamate, suggesting that the prescribing restrictions on benzodiazepines had little net benefit on abuse risk in the population and may have increased the risk of overdose morbidity and mortality.
Using urinary carisoprodol data from pain patients, our objectives were to determine the relationship between carisoprodol concentration and its conversion to meprobamate, and quantify the intra-subject and inter-subject variability in carisoprodol metabolism. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was used to quantitate carisoprodol and meprobamate concentrations in urine specimens. The log creatinine-corrected carisoprodol versus log creatinine-corrected meprobamate showed a marginal positive relationship (R(2) = 0.395), with a 29.1-fold variance between subjects at the mean carisoprodol concentration. The geometric mean carisoprodol and meprobamate urine concentrations were 0.519 +/- 3.38 mg and 28.2 +/- 2.34 mg analyte per gram creatinine, respectively. The log metabolic ratio (MR) versus log creatinine-corrected carisoprodol displayed a marginal positive correlation. A subpopulation of outliers with higher carisoprodol and lower meprobamate levels were considered poor metabolizers and represented 0.483% (n = 21) of the study population. Using a curve-fit mathematical model, we estimated 0.318% (n = 10) to be ultra-rapid metabolizers. The inter-subject population geometric standard deviation (SD) of the MR was 3.64. The intra-subject geometric median and mean SD of the MR were 1.60 (interquartile range: 1.28, 2.07) and 1.72 +/- 1.60, respectively. Inter-subject variability was 2.27 times greater than the median intra-subject variability. With a better understanding of urine carisoprodol and meprobamate concentrations and variability, urine drug testing provides a useful monitoring reference for clinicians.
In a follow-up study of 50,282 pregnancies (lasting at least five lunar months) and the offspring, malformations identified before the first birthday, or at death before the fourth birthday, were identified in 3248 children (6.5 per cent). A total of 1870 children exposed in utero to meprobamate or chlordiazepoxide were compared with 48,412 children who were not. No significant differences were found either overall or in specific outcomes; rates were also similar when exposures occurred during the first trimester or at other times during pregnancy. Deaths (stillbirth to the fourth birthday) occurred in 2227 children (4.4 per cent), and there was no evidence that antenatal exposure to either drug increased the death rate. Finally, as judged by mental and motor scores at the age of eight months, and intelligence quotient scores at four years, there was no evidence that the drugs cause brain damage.
On a residential research ward, the acute effects of placebo, lorazepam (LZ) (1.5-9.0 mg) and meprobamate (MEP) (600-3600 mg) were examined using a within-subject double-blind Latin Square design in nine male subjects with histories of drug abuse. Drug effects were assessed with objective performance tasks, subject estimates of performance, staff ratings of drug effects and subject ratings of drug effects, sleep, mood, drug liking and monetary street value. Generally, both LZ and MEP produced comparable dose-related effects; LZ had a more rapid onset of action and on several measures showed a more shallow dose-response curve than MEP. With LZ, but not MEP, subjects under-estimated the degree to which their performance was impaired and under-rated drug effects as compared to analogous staff ratings. Both drugs produced sedation-like subject ratings of mood and sleep but generally did not produce tranquilization-like ratings. MEP produced subject ratings of drug liking and monetary street value which were equal to or in some cases greater than those of LZ. Relative potency estimations showed that LZ was 510 to 783 times more potent than MEP in producing performance impairment but was only 370 times more potent than MEP in producing subject ratings of drug liking. Overall, these data indicate that the likelihood of abuse of MEP is at least equal to if not greater than that of LZ although LZ may have a greater likelihood of producing adverse behavioral effects such as a performance impairment and under-estimates of the degree of impairment. These data in conjunction with previous results from this laboratory show that the behavioral effects of benzodiazepines can be differentiated from those of other types of sedative/anxiolytics and that MEP displays characteristics of a barbiturate-like profile of action.
An automated solid-phase extraction (SPE) protocol followed by gas chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry was developed for quantification of caffeine, cyamemazine, meprobamate, morphine and 6-monoacetylmorphine (6-MAM) in 11 biological matrices [blood, urine, bile, vitreous humor, liver, kidney, lung and skeletal muscle, brain, adipose tissue and bone marrow (BM)]. The assay was validated for linearity, within- and between-day precision and accuracy, limits of quantification, selectivity, extraction recovery (ER), sample dilution and autosampler stability on BM. For the other matrices, partial validation was performed (limits of quantification, linearity, within-day precision, accuracy, selectivity and ER). The lower limits of quantification were 12.5 ng/mL(ng/g) for 6-MAM, morphine and cyamemazine, 100 ng/mL(ng/g) for meprobamate and 50 ng/mL(ng/g) for caffeine. Analysis of real-case samples demonstrated the performance of the assay in forensic toxicology to investigate challenging cases in which, for example, blood is not available or in which analysis in alternative matrices could be relevant. The SPE protocol was also assessed as an extraction procedure that could target other relevant analytes of interest. The extraction procedure was applied to 12 molecules of forensic interest with various physicochemical properties (alimemazine, alprazolam, amitriptyline, citalopram, cocaine, diazepam, levomepromazine, nordazepam, tramadol, venlafaxine, pentobarbital and phenobarbital). All drugs were able to be detected at therapeutic concentrations in blood and in the alternate matrices.
OBJECTIVE: Meprobamate self-poisoning has been reported as potentially inducing hypotension. We examined the incidence and causes of hypotension induced by this poisoning and its prognosis. DESIGN AND SETTING: Retrospective observational study conducted in a medical ICU between June 1997 and October 2003. Seventy-four patients admitted for meprobamate poisoning and needing mechanical ventilation were included. Demographic, clinical, and laboratory data were compared between patients with and without hypotension. All echocardiograms recorded in patients with hypotension were reviewed, and left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV) functions were assessed. RESULTS: Twenty-nine (40%) patients exhibited hypotension without any significant difference in age, gender, cardiac history, or meprobamate concentration in blood when compared to patients without hypotension. Base excess was significantly lower in patients with hypotension. Echocardiography demonstrated a hypokinetic state, associating decreased LV ejection fraction (45+/-15%) and cardiac index (2+/-0.7 l min(-1) m(-2)), and increased inferior vena cava diameter. Most patients with hypotension received inotropic drugs by infusion, and were ventilated for significantly longer. CONCLUSIONS: Meprobamate self-poisoning induces hypotension, notably related to cardiac failure, in about 40% of cases. This has important therapeutic consequences, as frequent inotropic drug infusion. The mechanisms of cardiac toxicity remain largely unknown, and no predictive factor could be isolated.
Clobazam is a benzodiazepine with anti-anxiety and anticonvulsant properties marketed in several countries. Norclobazam, a metabolite of clobazam, has similar pharmacological activity but weaker sedative and tranquilizing effect. The two drugs were detected by GC-MS and determined by HPLC-DAD in the samples from a postmortem case. The femoral blood concentrations of clobazam and norclobazam were 0.72 and 36 mug/mL, respectively. The concentration of the active norclobazam was very high. The sum of both clobazam and norclobazam blood concentration (36.72 mug/mL) was clearly toxic, but was not necessarily fatal. Other associated drugs concentrations were within their therapeutic ranges. Interactions due to drug association were discussed.
A case involving a suicidal overdose resulting from the ingestion of 90 tablets (400 mg) of meprobamate is presented. The drug was quantified using a gas chromatograph equipped with a flame ionization detector (FID). While the blood level was 204.6 micrograms/ml, the maximum concentration was found in the heart (708 micrograms/g), confirming the cardiac toxicity of meprobamate. Other drugs were not detected.
A method for the identification and quantification of meprobamate or carisoprodol in plasma by GC/FID is presented. The method employs vinylbarbital as the internal standard and requires no derivatization. After a single extraction, analysis is achieved in 7 min. This method is thus rapid, sensitive, reproducible, selective, and applicable to forensic and clinical toxicological analyses.
The relations between the levels of alcohol and meprobamate in the blood and performance on a visual-motor coordination tracking task were analyzed by a general system of mathematical models, using data from Experiment V by Carpenter et al. [J. Stud. Alc., Suppl. No. 7, pp. 54-139, 1975]. The derivation of the models is described. In general, the relationship between blood alcohol concentration (BAC) and performance was nonmonotonic: best performance occurred at BACS of 10 to 20 mg per 100 ml. The relationship between meprobamate concentration (BMC) and performance was monotonic: performance deteriorated with increasing BMC. The results of the reaction latency measure, howevr, showed no consistent relationship with BAC or BMC. The action of alcohol can be represented by a model which involves 2 distinct sites of action; that of meprobamate, 1 site. It could not be determined whether the site of action of meprobamate is distinct from those of alcohol because the blood levels of the drugs were not high enough. The implications of the results are discussed, with particular reference to the quantitative description of the joint action of drugs and the design of future experiments.
Carisoprodol (CSP) is a musculoskeletal relaxant whose active metabolite is meprobamate (MPB). This drug has recently been noticed to be abused as an inexpensive alternative to illicit drugs in Korea. A method using solid-phase extraction (SPE) and gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) was developed for the determination of CSP and MPB in human hair. Hair samples (30 mg) were washed with distilled water and acetone, cut into small fragments (<1 mm), incubated in 1.0 M HCl overnight at 50 degrees C, and then adjusted to pH 6.5. The drugs were extracted from the resulting hydrolyzed solutions using a SPE column. The eluents were evaporated to dryness, then derivatized using N,O-bis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) with 1% trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) at 120 degrees C for 30 min. The derivatized extract (1 microL) was injected into the GC/MS system. Recoveries were in the range of 91.5-93.1% for CSP and 85.5-93.0% for MPB. The linear ranges were 0.5-10.0 ng/mg for both CSP and MPB with good correlation coefficients (r(2) = 0.995). The intra-day precision and accuracy ranged from 1.5 to 9.3% and -17.5 to 3.6%, respectively, and the inter-day precision and accuracy ranged from 3.9 to 6.2% and -15.0 to -3.9%, respectively. The limits of detection for CSP and MPB were 0.13 and 0.12 ng/mg, respectively. The applicability of the method was proven by analyzing a hair sample from an authentic abuser.
Five experiments were conducted to study the effects of alcohol and meprobamate, administered singly and in combination, at doses up to 1.20 g of alcohol per kg of body weight and up to 30 mg of meprobamate per kg. Most of the 158 men were of college age (range, 21-49). In all experiments it appeared to the subjects that both drugs were administered, alcohol as a 25% solution in orange juice and meprobamate as 10 tablets. One hour after the men took the meprobamate they had 1 hr to drink the beverage. Before and at 1/2 hr intervals after administration of the drugs blood samples were taken and behavioral response measured by means of a visual-motor coordination tracking task (Stressalyzer). An experimental session lasted 6 hr. In Experiment I (E-I) each of 12 men was tested on 2 days, after 0, 1.00 or 1.20 g of alcohol per kg and 0 or 25 mg of meprobamate per kg. In Experiment II (E-II) 56 men were tested (8 per group) after 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 or 30 mg of meprobamate per kg and alcohol placebo. In Experiment III (E-III) 40 men were tested (8 per group) after 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, or 1.00 g of alcohol per kg and meprobamate placebo. In Experiment IV (E-IV) 25 men (5 per group) received meprobamate 3 times a day (total daily dosage, 0, 7, 14, 21 or 28 mg per kg) for 12 days. On days 8 to 12 all subjects drank alcohol, as in E-III. In Experiment V (E-V) 25 subjects (5 per group) were tested on 5 days, drinking each day the same doses of alcohol as in E-III and all received the same doses of meprobamate as in E-IV.
These studies extend previous observations on the effects of pentobarbital on subjective states and postrotational nystagmus in postaddict subjects. Pentobarbital (150 mg) induced a degree of liking and an elevation of the morphine-benzedrine group (MBG) scale score equivalent to 24 mg of morphine. The effects of pentobarbital and meprobamate on postrotational nystagmus were studied using electro-oculography. Both drugs increased the frequency and prolonged the duration of postrotational nystagmus in a dose-related manner. Meprobamate was about 1/15 as potent as pentobarbital in enhancing postrotational nystagmus and producing signs of sedation.
