Sweet's syndrome is an acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis. Drug-induced Sweet's syndrome typically occurs soon after drug administration, with rapid resolution of symptoms with cessation of the offending agent. We report a man in his early 40s who presented with fever and widespread erythematous rash on a background of recently diagnosed mild stricturing ileal Crohn's disease. He was commenced on 6-mercaptopurine 12 days before presentation. Skin biopsy demonstrated diffuse infiltration of neutrophils in the upper dermis, dermal oedema, eosinophils and fibrin deposition. Symptoms rapidly improved with cessation of 6-mercaptopurine without requiring systemic corticosteroids.
The role of immunosuppressives in the treatment of Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis will be reviewed. This will include a comprehensive presentation of the uncontrolled and controlled studies in both diseases. The author's personal experiences with more than 400 patients will be summarized, including efficacy and short- and long-term toxicity. A review of the literature regarding the risk of superinfections and neoplasia will be presented. Finally, specific indications for the use of 6-MP/azathioprine will be listed.
Phosphorene ability for delivery of mercaptopurine and fluorouracil was investigated by the density functional theory (DFT) method. However, the effects of Na, Ca, and Fe as dopants on phosphorene electronic properties such as HOMO and LUMO energies, density of states, chemical potential, electrophilicity index, softness, hardness, and its ability for drug delivery were studied. Natural bond orbital (NBO) analysis was performed. Our findings indicate that metallic dopants can improve the ability of phosphorene. Calcium-doped phosphorene has the greatest adsorption energy.
Azathioprine (36 microM) had a significantly (P less than 0.00003) greater inhibitory effect on human MLR responses below 20,000 counts/min than on responses above 20,000 counts/min. In contrast, 6-mercaptopurine (100 microM) had a similar suppressive effect on MLR responses below and above 20,000 counts/min suggesting it has a different mode of action to azathioprine.
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles with amino and thiol groups (MSNSN) were prepared and covalently modified with methotrexate and 6-mercaptopurine to form 6-MP-MSNSN-MTX. In the presence of DTT, 6-MP-MSNSN-MTX gradually releases 6-MP. In rat plasma, 6-MP-MSNSN-MTX effectively inhibits the metabolic deactivation of 6-MP and MTX. 6-MP-MSNSN-MTX could be an agent for long-acting chemotherapy.
A sensitive and accurate reversed phase liquid chromatographic assay was developed for the determination of 6-mercaptopurine (6MP) (the active metabolite of azathioprine) in human plasma. The assay involved extraction into acetonitrile and dichloromethane from plasma pretreated with 0.038 M of dithiothreitol solution. The residue was analyzed by isocratic chromatography on a C18 analytical column with UV detection at 326 nm. The average extraction recovery of 6MP was 85%. The method has been applied successfully to the determination of 6MP and its metabolites in pharmacokinetic studies.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to define the clinical, biochemical, and histologic features of liver injury from thiopurines. BACKGROUND: Azathioprine (Aza) and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) can cause liver injury, but no large series exist. METHODS: Clinical and laboratory data and 6-month outcomes of patients with thiopurine hepatotoxicity from the Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network Prospective Study were analyzed. RESULTS: Twenty-two patients were identified, 12 due to Aza and 10 due to 6-MP, with a median age of 55 years; the majority were female (68%). Inflammatory bowel disease was the indication in 55%, and the median thiopurine dose was 150 (range, 25 to 300) mg daily. The median latency to onset was 75 (range, 3 to 2584) days. Injury first arose after a dose escalation in 59% of patients, the median latency after dose increase being 44 (range, 3 to 254) days. At onset, the median alanine aminotransferase level was 210 U/L, alkaline phosphatase was 151 U/L, and bilirubin was 7.4 mg/dL (peak, 13.4 mg/dL). There were no major differences between Aza and 6-MP cases, but anicteric cases typically had nonspecific symptoms and a hepatocellular pattern of enzyme elevations, whereas icteric cases experienced cholestatic hepatitis with modest enzyme elevations in a mixed pattern. One patient with preexisting cirrhosis required liver transplantation; all others resolved clinically. One patient still had moderate alkaline phosphatase elevations 2 years after onset. CONCLUSIONS: Nearly three-quarters of patients with thiopurine-induced liver injury present with self-limited, cholestatic hepatitis, typically within 3 months of starting or a dose increase. The prognosis is favorable except in patients with preexisting cirrhosis.
BACKGROUND: Measurement of the degree of adherence is a key element for the evaluation of treatment efficacy and safety; thus, adherence plays an important role in clinical research and practice. The aim of this study was to investigate medication adherence in children with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) utilizing a multimethod assessment approach. A further aim was to examine factors that can influence adherence within this population. METHODS: Medication adherence in 47 children (age range 3 to 17 years) with IBD in three centers in Northern Ireland and Jordan was assessed via subjective (parent and child versions of the Medication Adherence Report Scale (MARS) specific questionnaire) and objective methods, that is, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) determination of the 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) and azathioprine (AZA) metabolites in packed red blood cell samples taken during a clinic visit. Beliefs about prescribed medicines were also assessed in parents/guardians using the Beliefs about Medicines Questionnaire (BMQ). RESULTS: An overall nonadherence to AZA/6-MP therapy in children with IBD was found to be 36.17% (17 out of 47 patients were classified as nonadherent using at least one of the assessment methods). A total of 41 patients (91.1%) were classified as adherent to AZA or 6-MP using the blood sampling, while adherence rates using the MARS questionnaire completed by children and parents/guardians were 60.6% and 72.7%, respectively. The latter provides a more longitudinal measure of adherence. Child self-reported nonadherence rates were significantly higher than parent/guardian reported rates (p=0.013). Binary logistic regression analysis identified age to be independently predictive of adherence, with adolescents (children aged >/= 13 years old) more likely to be classified as nonadherent. Regarding the BMQ, when parental/guardian necessity beliefs outweighed concerns, that is, higher scores in the necessity-concern differential (NCD), adolescents were more likely to be classified as adherent. CONCLUSION: Results provide evidence for ongoing adherence challenges in the paediatric population with IBD. It is recommended that parents/guardians (particularly of older children) and older children themselves, should receive enhanced counselling and education about their prescribed medicines.
Macrophage activation syndrome is a life-threatening syndrome of uncontrolled immune activation with variable clinical presentation making early diagnosis difficult. It is often manifested by the development of multi-organ failure due to systemic inflammatory response. Patients with ulcerative colitis (UC) on purine antimetabolites are at high risk for severe myelosuppression due to the mechanism of thiopurine toxicity which potentially contributes to the development of macrophage activation syndrome. We present a case of a 39-year-old woman with a 2-year history of UC previously treated with 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) and recent COVID-19 infection, who was admitted to our emergency department for C. difficile infection and subsequently developed macrophage activation syndrome. This case report also raises the question of whether abrupt discontinuation of 6-MP may have contributed to the worsening of the patient's symptoms of underlying hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) and her rapid deterioration. Both macrophage activation syndrome and COVID-19 infection can produce a large number of pro-inflammatory cytokines termed "cytokine storm," but a pro-inflammatory cytokine panel breakdown helps to differentiate between the two. Our case report emphasizes the importance of close monitoring of patients on purine antimetabolite therapy who present with signs and symptoms of systemic toxicity.
The thiopurine drugs azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) are well-established in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, there is a wide inter- and intra-patient variation in the concentrations of active and toxic metabolites due to their complex metabolism and genetic polymorphisms in metabolizing enzymes. Serious drug toxicity leads to cessation of therapy in 9-25% of patients, and there is failure to achieve efficacy in approximately 15% of cases. Advances in the understanding of thiopurine drug metabolism have led to new genetic and metabolite tests to help clinicians optimize thiopurine use. Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) enzyme activity can predict life-threatening myelotoxicity in the one in 300 patients who are TPMT-deficient. However, myelotoxicity can also occur in the presence of normal TPMT activity so blood count monitoring should remain standard practice. TPMT testing may also aid in dose individualization. 6-Thioguanine nucleotides (6-TGN) are thought to be the predominant active metabolites of the thiopurines. 6-thioguanine nucleotide concentration is correlated with bone marrow toxicity and may also correlate with efficacy in IBD. Measurement of 6-TGN and 6-methylmercaptopurine (6-MMP) concentration is most useful in determining why a patient is not responding to a standard dose of a thiopurine drug and may help in avoiding myelosuppression. The ratio of these metabolites can help distinguish non-compliance, under-dosing, thiopurine-resistant and thiopurine-refractory disease. Some of these investigations are entering routine clinical practice but more research is required to determine their optimal use in patients with IBD.
Mercaptopurine (6MP) is used to treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and is metabolized by hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosal transferase to form 6-thioguanine nucleotide (6TGN). It is also metabolized by thiopurine methyl-transferase to produce 6-methylmercaptopurine (6MMP). Elevated levels of 6MMP have been associated with toxic effects that may interfere with therapy. Allopurinol is known to inhibit thiopurine methyl-transferase which reduces red cell 6MMP and increases 6TGN. Allopurinol has been utilized successfully in adult and pediatric patients with inflammatory bowel disease who have experienced 6MMP related gastrointestinal toxicity. Between August 2015 and August 2018 we started 25 patients with ALL in maintenance on allopurinol in combination with a reduced dose of 6MP. They all had unacceptable side-effects from elevated 6MMP, including abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, decreased appetite, hypoglycemia, fatigue, and liver toxicity. In addition many had a facial rash. All patients showed resolution of symptoms within a few weeks after starting allopurinol. The red cell levels of 6MMP rapidly declined in the first month. The red cell levels of 6TGN transiently increased in spite of the lower 6MP dose. There was no decrease in absolute neutrophil count or hemoglobin. Platelets decreased slightly not requiring therapy modification. Elevated bilirubin normalized, and alanine aminotransferase decreased significantly with most normalizing. All patients continued on allopurinol with reduced dose 6MP until completing therapy. Allopurinol, in conjunction with a reduced dose of 6MP, effectively resolves 6MMP related side-effects in ALL patients on maintenance chemotherapy. This approach may lead to increased adherence to oral 6MP during ALL maintenance in patients with 6MMP induced side-effects.
BACKGROUND: The thiopurine drugs, 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) and azathioprine (AZA), remain as a mainstay therapy in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Differences in metabolism of these drugs lead to individual variation in thiopurine metabolite levels that can determine its therapeutic efficacy and development of adverse reactions. In this update, we will review thiopurine metabolic pathway along with the up-to-date approaches in administering thiopurine medications based on the current literature. METHODS: A search of the PubMed database by 2 independent reviewers identifying 98 articles evaluating thiopurine metabolism and IBD management. RESULTS: Monitoring thiopurine metabolites can assist physicians in optimizing 6-MP and AZA therapy in treating patients with IBD. Of the dosing strategies reviewed, we found evidence for monitoring thiopurine metabolite level, use of allopurinol with thiopurine, use of mesalamine with thiopurine, combination therapy with thiopurine and anti-tumor necrosis factor agents, and split dosing of AZA or 6-MP to optimize thiopurine therapy and minimize adverse effects in IBD. CONCLUSIONS: Based on the currently available literature, various dosing strategies to improve therapeutic response and reduce adverse reactions can be considered, including use of allopurinol with thiopurine, use of mesalamine with thiopurine, combination therapy with thiopurine and anti-tumor necrosis factor agents, and split dosing of thiopurine.
Flavonoids are natural phenolic compounds, which are the active ingredients in several dietary supplements. It is well-known that some flavonoid aglycones are potent inhibitors of the xanthine oxidase (XO)-catalyzed uric acid formation in vitro. However, the effects of conjugated flavonoid metabolites are poorly characterized. Furthermore, the inhibition of XO-catalyzed 6-mercaptopurine oxidation is an important reaction in the pharmacokinetics of this antitumor drug. The inhibitory effects of some compounds on xanthine vs. 6-mercaptopurine oxidation showed large differences. Nevertheless, we have only limited information regarding the impact of flavonoids on 6-mercaptopurine oxidation. In this study, we examined the interactions of flavonoid aglycones and some of their conjugates with XO-catalyzed xanthine and 6-mercaptopurine oxidation in vitro. Diosmetin was the strongest inhibitor of uric acid formation, while apigenin showed the highest effect on 6-thiouric acid production. Kaempferol, fisetin, geraldol, luteolin, diosmetin, and chrysoeriol proved to be similarly strong inhibitors of xanthine and 6-mercaptopurine oxidation. While apigenin, chrysin, and chrysin-7-sulfate were more potent inhibitors of 6-mercaptopurine than xanthine oxidation. Many flavonoids showed similar or stronger (even 5- to 40-fold) inhibition of XO than the positive control allopurinol. Based on these observations, the extremely high intake of flavonoids may interfere with the elimination of 6-mercaptopurine.
6-Mercaptopurine (6-MP) is used extensively in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and inflammatory bowel diseases. Our laboratory determined previously, using a recombinant HEK293 cell model, that the SLC43A3-encoded equilibrative nucleobase transporter 1 (ENBT1) transports 6-MP into cells and significantly impacts the cytotoxicity of 6-MP in that model. To further investigate the clinical relevance of this finding, we now extend this work to an analysis of the impact of SLC43A3/ENBT1 expression and function on 6-MP uptake and cytotoxicity in leukemic lymphoblasts, the therapeutic target of 6-MP in ALL. A panel of ALL cell lines was assessed for SLC43A3/ENBT1 expression, ENBT1 function, and sensitivity to 6-MP. There was a significant difference in SLC43A3 expression among the cell lines that positively correlated with the rate of ENBT1-mediated 6-MP uptake. Cells with the lowest expression of SLC43A3 (SUP-B15: V(max) = 22+/- 5 pmol/microl per second) were also significantly less sensitive to 6-MP-induced cytotoxicity than were the highest expressing cells (ALL-1: V(max) = 69 +/- 10 pmol/microl per second). Furthermore, knockdown of ENBT1 using short hairpin RNA interference (shRNAi) in RS4;11 cells caused a significant decrease in ENBT1-mediated 6-MP uptake (V(max): RS4;11 = 40 +/- 4 pmol/microl per second; RS4;11 shRNAi = 26 +/- 3 pmol/microl per Second) and 6-MP cytotoxicity (EC(50): RS4;11 = 0.58 +/- 0.05 microM; RS4;11 shRNAi =1.44 +/- 0.59 microM). This study showed that ENBT1 is a major contributor to 6-MP uptake in leukemia cell lines and may prove to be a biomarker for the therapeutic efficacy of 6-MP in patients with ALL. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This study shows that SLC43A3-encoded equilibrative nucleobase transporter 1 is responsible for the transport of 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) into leukemia cells and that its level of expression can impact the cytotoxicity of 6-MP. Further studies are warranted to investigate the therapeutic implications in patient populations.
BACKGROUND: Thiopurines such as azathioprine (AZA) and mercaptopurine (MP) are commonly utilized to treat inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Their use is frequently restricted due to gastrointestinal intolerance (GI). Previous retrospective studies have reported that AZA-intolerant patients may benefit from a switch to MP; yet the effectiveness of this strategy has not been prospectively evaluated. AIMS: To assess GI tolerance to MP in patients who are intolerant to AZA, and to identify clinical predictors of GI intolerance to AZA or MP. METHODS: A prospective, observational, single-cohort study was performed in 92 thiopurine-naive IBD patients. They were started on a 50mg dose of AZA and escalated to 2.5mg/kg per day by week 2. Those with GI intolerance were rechallenged with a 50% dose of AZA, after which another dose escalation attempt was made. If symptoms persisted, they were switched to MP. RESULTS: Thirty (32.6%) of the recruited patients suffered from GI intolerance to AZA. Of these, 15 did not present recurrence of symptoms after rechallenge with lower doses. Of 15 intolerant patients, 14 were switched to MP. Within the MP cohort, 8 patients (57%) were also intolerant to MP, 5 (36%) had no symptoms, and 1 (7%) was lost to follow-up. Female gender was the only independent predictor of GI intolerance to AZA. CONCLUSIONS: Up to half of the AZA-intolerant patients tolerated a 50% dose rechallenge that was successfully escalated. A switch to MP was tolerated in over a third of cases whom rechallenge failed. Our strategy (challenge-rechallenge-switch) achieved an overall GI tolerance to thiopurines in most of the patients.
