OBJECTIVE: To test the effects of a standard dosage of the psychostimulant methylphenidate (MPH) - which significantly enhances intracortical inhibition but had no effects on intracortical facilitation in children with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) - on intracortical excitability in healthy subjects. METHOD: In 12 healthy subjects, aged 20-40 years, intracortical inhibition and facilitation were investigated before and 70 min after the intake of 10 mg MPH using the technique of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) with the paired-stimulus paradigm. RESULTS: In comparison of the two TMS measurements, a significant enhancement in intracortical facilitation but no effects on intracortical inhibition could be stated under MPH administration. CONCLUSION: This study provides first evidence for opposite effects of MPH on intracortical excitability in healthy adult subjects showing enhanced intracortical facilitation in contrast to ADHD children in whom enhanced intracortical inhibition has recently been shown.
Methylphenidate is prescribed for over 90% of children in the US diagnosed as having attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Although ADHD has been widely studied, the use of methylphenidate in ADHD still poses a number of unresolved questions, including its pharmacodynamic characteristics (drug concentration-effect relationship) and the effect of long term treatment on the patient's psychopathology later in life. The objective of this review is to provide an analysis of the pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic properties and therapeutic effectiveness of methylphenidate that may help to answer some of these questions. Methylphenidate has 2 chiral centres, but the drug used in therapy comprises only the threo pair of enantiomers. d-threo-Methylphenidate is more potent than the l-enantiomer. Methylphenidate is administered as a racemic mixture that undergoes stereoselective clearance. Methylphenidate is a short-acting stimulant with a duration of action of 1 to 4 hours and a pharmacokinetic half-life of 2 to 3 hours. Maximum drug concentration after oral administration occurs at about 2 hours. Methylphenidate is absorbed well from the gastrointestinal tract and easily passes to the brain. Methylphenidate is efficacious for short term treatment for children with ADHD. Its mechanism of action is not understood, but may be associated with its influence on multiple neurotransmitters, especially the release and reuptake of dopamine in the striatum. There is marked individual variability in the dose-response relationship for methylphenidate, and therefore dosage must be titrated for optimal effect and avoidance of toxicity in each child. It is unclear whether this variability is predominantly pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic. If variable stereoselective metabolism occurs clinically, therapeutic drug monitoring of methylphenidate will require the application of chiral assay methods for the analysis of the active component, d-threo-methylphenidate. It is difficult to predict which children will have a favourable response to methylphenidate. Nonetheless, several studies have been published linking the severity of ADHD in children with improved clinical response to methylphenidate. The use of individual single-blind medication trials may be a practical solution to this problem. Additionally, the targeted condition warrants careful consideration, since different conditions (e.g. misbehaviour or poor academic performance) may require different regimens. Further studies of the relationship between the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of methylphenidate are required to allow the development of optimal dosage regimens.
INTRODUCTION: Methylphenidate remains a first-line medication for treating ADHD in children and adults. However, its behavioral pharmacological similarities to methamphetamine and cocaine have historically created concern for its potential as a drug of abuse. In September 2019, the FDA published a docket requesting comments for the development of abuse deterrent formulations for CNS stimulants, emphasizing the abuse of methylphenidate as a public health concern. AREAS COVERED: We conducted a narrative review of research on the clinical pharmacology, therapeutic efficacy, and abuse potential of methylphenidate. EXPERT OPINION: Several studies indicate that methylphenidate has at least some abuse potential. Methylphenidate, amphetamine, methamphetamine, and cocaine overlap in their subjective, reinforcing, and discriminative stimulus effects. Regardless, methylphenidate remains an efficacious treatment for ADHD in children and adults when properly adhered to, especially when paired with non-pharmacological treatments. The development of abuse deterrent formulations of methylphenidate is warranted.
Methylphenidate (MPH) is primarily indicated for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and narcolepsy therapy. A marked individual variability in the dose-response has been observed, and therefore dosage must be titrated for optimal therapeutic effect with minimal toxicity. This variability has been claimed to be predominantly pharmacokinetic. Moreover, due to its similar pharmacodynamics to amphetamine, MPH has been abused and fatalities have been reported. This review aims to discuss metabolomics of MPH, namely by presenting all major and minor metabolites. Ritalinic acid is the main metabolite. In addition, minor pathways involving aromatic hydroxylation, microsomal oxidation and conjugation have also been reported to form the p-hydroxy-, oxo- and conjugated metabolites, respectively. MPH may undergo transesterification with ethanol producing ethylphenidate, which is also pharmacologically active. It is expected that knowing the metabolomics of MPH may provide further insights regarding individual contribution for MPH pharmacodynamics and toxicological effects, namely if ethanol is co-consumed.
Whilst an increasing number of children survive previously incurable cancers of the central nervous system (CNS), associated treatments often result in significant neurocognitive late effects. Methylphenidate provides some signs of alleviating cognitive difficulties in different pediatric groups; however, a minimal amount of systematic work has explored its effectiveness isolated to vulnerable attentional domains. The current review aimed to explore the effectiveness of methylphenidate isolated to two attentional domains (sustained and selective attention)-with an aim to substantiate its utility in childhood cancer survivors. Five databases were comprehensively searched for relevant articles. A purpose-developed tool was used to assess each study's robustness and research quality. Eleven out of 1,865 identified articles were included within the review. Studies drew upon five clinical populations. Individual attentional domains demonstrate variation in their response to methylphenidate. Sustained attention demonstrated the most consistent benefit of methylphenidate, reported largely in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) groups. Gains in selective attention and higher-order cognitive functions appeared to follow initial gains in sustained attention. Childhood cancer survivors report greater gains in selective attention compared to sustained attention. Higher doses may yield greater benefit for children with more diffuse attentional deficits. There is a need to improve the validity of current attentional measures before further methylphenidate trials are conducted.
Various psychotropic drugs may affect the hematological and biochemical profiles of plasma and its metabolism. Carbamazepine, the most well-known psychotropic drug, can cause substantial hyponatremia. Methylphenidate, a piperidine derivative structurally related to amphetamines, acts as a central nervous system stimulant. The current study evaluated whether methylphenidate affects hematological and biochemical parameters of patients diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.Patients undergoing treatment for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder at our Adolescent Psychiatric Clinic were enrolled in the study. Blood samples for complete blood count and common biochemical analyses were collected before patients started methylphenidate and after 3 months of continuous treatment.Participants included 64 patients comprised the study cohort. There were 48 (75%) males and 16 (25%) females, with a median age of 16 years (range 11-31). The total median potassium level decreased by 0.6 mg/dL (P < .0001), while glucose rose by 15 mg/dL (P < .0001), sodium decreased in 0.7meq/L, (P = .006). The white blood count rose by 1350 cells/muL (P < .033) due to neutrophilia, lymphocytosis and eosinophilia. Hemoglobin rose slightly by 0.1 (P = .041). Changes in calcium, phosphorus, protein, albumin, and liver enzyme levels were not significant.The results indicate that methylphenidate may cause hypokalemia and elevated glucose, leukocyte, neutrophil, lymphocyte and eosinophil counts.
BACKGROUND: This article presents a bioethical analysis of the use of Methylphenidate and Atomoxetine, exploring their roles as cognitive enhancers and therapeutic agents for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). METHODS: The analysis centers around the principle of non-maleficence, examining the ethical implications of causing harm in the pursuit of cognitive enhancement and therapeutic benefits. It delves into the blurred boundaries between therapy and enhancement and the challenges of defining "necessary harm" in these contexts. RESULTS: When used for cognitive enhancement rather than therapeutic purposes, methylphenidate challenges the concept of "necessary harm," raising ethical concerns about seeking improvement at the cost of potential adverse effects. The very notion of neurocognitive enhancement remains controversial in the absence of a clinical pathology. In pediatric ADHD, there is a significant lack of long-term data on both therapeutic benefits and adverse effects beyond 30 weeks of treatment. Clinical trials have highlighted safety concerns, as methylphenidate has been linked to sleep disturbances, anorexia, nervous conditions, and, in rare cases, cardiac events. Additionally, exposure during pregnancy may pose risks of congenital malformations. While atomoxetine generally has minor side effects, occasional reports of suicidal tendencies warrant caution. DISCUSSION: The article discusses the philosophical and ethical underpinnings of human nature, individual autonomy, and the pursuit of enhancement, drawing on historical perspectives from figures like Julian Huxley and contemporary transhumanist ideals. CONCLUSION: The study advocates for a cautious approach to cognitive enhancement, emphasizing the preservation of the individual's well-being over performance gains. In the context of ADHD treatment, it calls for an ethical examination of the long-term effects of Methylphenidate and Atomoxetine use in children and adolescents, recommending a preference for behavioral treatments when possible. Pediatric ADHD: There is a notable scarcity of data regarding the prevalence of therapeutic benefits and/or adverse effects in treatments exceeding 30 weeks. Furthermore, clinical trials concerning its safety and the lack of long-term data compromise the principle of non-maleficence, as we know that the use of Methylphenidate can lead to sleep disorders, anorexic conditions, nervous disorders, and has occasionally been associated with cardiac events. It also has effects on pregnancy that can lead to malformations in offspring. And although the unwanted effects associated with atomoxetine are generally minor, suicidal tendencies have been occasionally reported.
Iron and zinc have been associated with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), executive functioning, and response to methylphenidate, given their link with the dopaminergic system. This study aimed to investigate the effect of withdrawing methylphenidate after long-term treatment on serum levels of ferritin and zinc; and if baseline (pre-discontinuation) serum levels of these nutritional markers moderated the effects of withdrawing methylphenidate on ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) symptoms, and working memory. Blood samples were collected from 63 children and adolescents who participated in a randomized, placebo-controlled methylphenidate discontinuation study. They were assigned to either seven weeks of continued treatment with methylphenidate or to gradual withdrawal to placebo. With mixed models for repeated measures we (i) compared changes in ferritin and zinc serum levels between both groups, and (ii) investigated moderating effects of ferritin and zinc on the effects of discontinuation on ADHD and ODD symptoms, and working memory. We additionally explored correlations of baseline and change serum levels with respective symptom scores. Withdrawing methylphenidate led to a decrease in ferritin levels. Higher baseline ferritin was associated with a larger increase (i.e., worsening) of teacher-rated hyperactivity-impulsivity and ODD symptoms after withdrawal; and higher baseline zinc with a larger increase in number of errors on the working memory task after withdrawal. Serum levels did not correlate with ADHD and ODD symptoms. Our preliminary results suggest that ferritin and zinc may be potential biomarkers for the effectiveness of long-term treatment with methylphenidate.
Objectives: The aim of the study was to assess auditory and visually based executive functions (EFs) and the effect of methylphenidate (MPH) in children with ADHD. Methods: Thirty-six boys between the ages of 8.3 and 9.7 years with ADHD and 36 matched controls were included. The study group was randomized into MPH and placebo for 7 days each in a crossover design. A Cued Choice Reaction Time (CCRT) test that included incongruent cuing was administered at baseline and following 1 and 2 weeks. Results: The difference between the study and control groups was more evident with visual cues and incongruent cuing. Increased gains by children with predominantly hyperactive-impulsive\combined (HI\C) type of ADHD were observed under MPH. Conclusions: The differences between children with ADHD and typical children are more pronounce under incongruent auditory cuing . The gains attributable to MPH are more specific to tasks involving auditory and visual EFs and in children with HI\C type ADHDs.
Methylphenidate (MPH) is a first line treatment for ADHD and is also misused as a purported cognitive enhancer, yet its effects on brain function are still poorly understood. Recent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies showed that MPH altered cortico-striatal resting functional connectivity (RFC). Here we investigated the effects of MPH in thalamic connectivity since the thalamus modulates striato-cortical signaling. We hypothesized that MPH would increase thalamic connectivity and metabolism, and that this response would be blunted in cannabis abusers. For this purpose, we measured RFC in seven thalamic nuclei using fMRI and brain glucose metabolism using positron emission tomography (PET) and (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in sixteen healthy controls and thirteen participants with cannabis use disorder (CUD) twice after placebo and after MPH (0.5 mg/kg, iv). MPH significantly increased thalamo-cerebellar connectivity and cerebellar metabolism to the same extent in both groups. Group comparisons revealed that in CUD compared to controls, metabolism in nucleus accumbens was lower for the placebo and MPH measures, that MPH-induced increases in thalamic metabolism were blunted, and that enhanced negative connectivity between thalamus and accumbens in CUD was normalized by MPH (reducing negative connectivity). Our findings identify the thalamus as a target of MPH, which increased its metabolism and connectivity. The reduced metabolism in nucleus accumbens and the disrupted thalamo-accumbens connectivity (enhanced negative connectivity) in CUD is consistent with impaired reactivity of the brain reward's circuit. MPH's normalization of thalamo-accumbens connectivity (reduced negative connectivity) brings forth its potential therapeutic value in CUD, which merits investigation.
Growth deficit associated with stimulants in children who have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has long been the subject of scientific discussion. More recent studies describe the effects on the final height of children with ADHD who are treated with methylphenidate (MPH) as only slight. There are only a handful of reports of severe growth deficits attributed to MPH that are associated with gastrointestinal side effects. We describe a 10-year-old boy with ADHD and chronic asthma who underwent corticosteroid therapy and developed an almost complete growth arrest during MPH treatment. Growth hormone (GH) stimulation tests and measurement of GH-dependent growth factors point to the influence of MPH on GH secretion with subsequent impaired growth. One may conclude that some children are at risk of serious growth decrement when treated with MPH. The growth of children should thus be monitored carefully, even if there are no alarming gastrointestinal side effects from MPH. We found that the determination of growth velocity was a sensitive marker for the evaluation of growth impairment in our patient.
This chapter reviews methylphenidate misuse, abuse, dependence, diversion, and malingering associated with its use as a prescription medication for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and the nonmedical use linked to its stimulant effects. Methylphenidate-induced regional elevations in brain dopamine appear to be integral to both efficacy in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and potential for abuse, raising potential concerns for drug safety and prescription drug diversion costs associated with nonmedical use. Regardless, methylphenidate is an important treatment option, and detecting malingering for the purpose of illicit access to methylphenidate for subsequent misuse or diversion is a difficult challenge. Also discussed are the effects of methylphenidate in patients with comorbid substance use disorder and the potential linkage of methylphenidate use with subsequent substance abuse. The current data suggest that methylphenidate misuse and diversion are common health-care problems with a stimulant prescription drug diversion prevalence of approximately 5-10 % of high school students and 5-35 % of college students. The effectiveness and speed of action of methylphenidate are deemed desirable to enhance attention and focus performance for activities such as studying for exams, but methylphenidate is also misused recreationally. These data suggest a need for close screening and therapeutic monitoring of methylphenidate use in the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is characterised by inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity. The DSM-IV diagnosis of ADHD requires the presence of six of nine items or features that must have been present for at least six months, to have had an onset before 7 years of age, and to have resulted in significant distress or impairment.1 In the general population, the prevalence of ADHD is approximately 5%.2 There is a high co-morbidity of epilepsy and attentional and behavioural problems,3,4 including ADHD, and it has been estimated that at least 20% of patients with epilepsy may present with features of ADHD.5.
PURPOSE: The primary aim of this study was to explore the potential of alternative sampling matrices for methylphenidate by assessing the correlations between dl-threo-methylphenidate and dl-threo-ritalinic acid concentrations in exhaled breath and oral fluid with those in plasma, in repeated samples collected after a single oral dose of methylphenidate. The secondary aim was to study the enantioselective pharmacokinetics of methylphenidate in plasma, with a focus on interindividual variability in the metabolism of methylphenidate to ritalinic acid. METHODS: Twelve healthy volunteers received a single oral dose of dl-threo-methylphenidate (Ritalin(R) capsules, 20 mg). Venous blood samples were collected for 24 h, and plasma analyzed for threo-enantiomers of methylphenidate and ritalinic acid with LC-MS/MS. Repeated sampling of exhaled breath, using a particle filter device, and of non-stimulated oral fluid, using a felt pad device, was also performed. Exhaled breath and oral fluid were analyzed with a non-enantioselective LC-MS/MS method for dl-threo-methylphenidate and dl-threo-ritalinic acid. RESULTS: In all subjects, d-threo-methylphenidate was detectable in plasma for at least 15 h after the dose with a biphasic profile. l-threo-Methylphenidate was measurable in only five subjects and in most cases in low concentrations. However, one female subject displayed a biphasic concentration-time profile for l-threo-methylphenidate. This subject also had the highest d-threo-methylphenidate AUC (191 ng*h/mL versus 32-119 ng*h/mL in the other subjects). d-threo-Ritalinic acid concentrations were on average 25-fold higher (range 6-126) than the corresponding d-threo-methylphenidate concentrations. Single-time point plasma concentration ratios between d-threo-ritalinic acid and d-threo-methylphenidate 1.5-12 h after dose correlated highly (r = 0.88-0.98) with the d-threo-ritalinic acid AUC/d-threo-methylphenidate AUC ratio. In eleven subjects, dl-threo-methylphenidate in oral fluid mirrored the biphasic profile of methylphenidate (sum of d- and l-threo-enantiomers) in plasma, but the concentrations in oral fluid were on average 1.8 times higher than in plasma. dl-threo-Methylphenidate was detected in exhaled breath in all subjects, but there was no consistent concentration-time pattern. CONCLUSIONS: In some subjects, the pharmacologically less active l-threo-enantiomer may contribute to the total plasma methylphenidate concentrations. Monitoring methylphenidate concentrations without enantiomeric determination carries the risk of missing such subjects, which might affect how the plasma concentrations of methylphenidate are interpreted and used for clinical decision making. The use of exhaled breath and oral fluid to assess medication adherence to MPH in patients with ADHD warrants further studies.
BACKGROUND: We studied the excretion profile of methylphenidate (MPH) and its metabolite ritalinic acid (RA) in oral fluid and plasma, the oral fluid-to-plasma (OF/P) drug ratio, and the variations of oral fluid pH after drug administration. METHODS: We analyzed oral fluid and plasma samples, obtained from 8 healthy volunteers after ingestion of a single dose of 20 mg fast-release or extended-release MPH, for MPH and RA by LC-MS. We estimated the apparent pharmacokinetic parameters of MPH in plasma and oral fluid and calculated the OF/P ratio for each time interval. RESULTS: MPH and RA were detected in oral fluid. Whereas parent drug concentrations in oral fluid were an order of magnitude higher than those in plasma, the opposite was observed for RA. Oral fluid concentrations of MPH ranged between 0.5 and 466.7 microg/L and peaked at 0.5 h after administration of the fast-release formulation; they ranged between 0.7 and 89.5 microg/L and peaked at 2 h after administration of the extended-release formulation. Both formulations presented bimodal time-course curves for the OF/P ratio, ranging between 1.8 and 242.1 for the fast-release formulation and between 2.6 and 27.0 for extended-release. Oral fluid pH did not appear to be modified by the administration of the drug, and its influence on OF/P ratio did not affect the correlation of MPH between the 2 body fluids. CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained support the measurement of MPH in oral fluid as an alternative to plasma if the extended-release formulation is used.
This study explores the hypotheses that: (1) ethanol will interact with dl-Methylphenidate (MPH) to enantioselectively elevate plasma d-MPH, and primarily yield l-ethylphenidate as a transesterification metabolite; (2) women will exhibit lower relative bioavailability of MPH than men; and (3) sex-dependent differences in subjective effects will exist. dl-MPH HCl (0.3 mg/kg) was administered orally 30 min before ethanol, 30 min after ethanol (0.6 gm/kg), or without ethanol, in a randomized, normal subject three-way crossover study of 10 men and 10 women. Pharmacokinetic parameters were compared. Subjective effects were recorded using visual analog scales. One subject was a novel poor MPH metabolizer whose data were analyzed separately. Ethanol after or before MPH significantly (P<0.0001) elevated the geometric mean for the maximum d-MPH plasma concentration (C(max) (+/-SD)) from 15.3 (3.37) ng/ml to 21.5 (6.81) and 21.4 (4.86), respectively, and raised the corresponding geometric mean for the area under the concentration-time curve values from 82.9 (21.7) ng ml/h to 105.2 (23.5) and 102.9 (19.2). l-MPH was present in plasma only at 1-3% of the concentration of d-MPH, except in the poor metabolizer where l-MPH exceeded that of d-MPH. The metabolite l-ethylphenidate frequently exceeded 1 ng/ml in plasma, whereas d-ethylphenidate was detected only in low pg/ml concentrations. Women reported a significantly greater stimulant effect than men when questioned "Do you feel any drug effect?" (P<0.05), in spite of lower mean plasma d-MPH area under the response-time curves in women. Ethanol elevates plasma d-MPH C(max) and area under the concentration-time curve by approximately 40% and 25%, respectively. If the poor metabolizer of MPH proves to be a distinct phenotype, determining the genetic mechanism may be of value for individualizing drug therapy. The more pronounced stimulant effects experienced by women have sex-based abuse liability implications.
