1 A new osmotic pressure mediated delivery system for metoprolol (Lopresor Oros) has been evaluated by measuring the haemodynamic effects and pharmacokinetics after single and multiple oral dosing in young healthy volunteers. 2 Similar studies have been carried out in the same group using equivalent single and multiple oral doses of the commercial slow-release preparation (Slow Lopresor). 3 The new osmotic delivery system produces a more uniform haemodynamic response: a plateau metoprolol concentration in plasma is reached about 6 h after dosing and is maintained for 10 h.
Aim: Few genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have been conducted to identify predictors of drug concentrations. The authors therefore sought to discover the pharmacogenomic markers involved in metoprolol pharmacokinetics. Patients & methods: The authors performed a GWAS of a cross-sectional study of 993 patients from the Montreal Heart Institute Biobank taking metoprolol. Results: A total of 391 and 444 SNPs reached the significance threshold of 5 x 10(-8) for metoprolol and alpha-OH-metoprolol concentrations, respectively. All were located on chromosome 22 at or near the CYP2D6 gene, encoding CYP450 2D6, metoprolol's main metabolizing enzyme. Conclusion: The results reinforce previous findings of the importance of the CYP2D6 locus for metoprolol concentrations and confirm that large biobanks can be used to identify genetic determinants of drug pharmacokinetics at a GWAS significance level.
Pharmaceuticals are found in waterbodies worldwide. Conventional sewage treatment plants are often not able to eliminate these micropollutants. Hence, Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) have been heavily investigated. Here, metoprolol is exposed to UV irradiation, hydrogen peroxide, and ozonation. Degradation was analyzed using chemical kinetics both for initial and secondary products. Photo-induced irradiation enhanced by hydrogen peroxide addition accelerated degradation more than ozonation, leading to complete elimination. Degradation and transformation products were identified by high-performance liquid-chromatography coupled to high-resolution higher-order mass spectrometry. The proposed structures allowed to apply Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR) analysis to predict ecotoxicity. Degradation products were generally associated with a lower ecotoxicological hazard to the aquatic environment according to OECD QSAR toolbox and VEGA. Comparison of potential structural isomers suggested forecasts may become more reliable with larger databases in the future.
BACKGROUND: Metoprolol is recommended for therapeutic use in multiple cardiovascular conditions, thyroid crisis, and circumscribed choroidal hemangioma. A detailed systematic review on the metoprolol literature would be beneficial to assess all pharmacokinetic parameters in humans and their respective effects on patients with hepatic, renal, and cardiovascular diseases. This review combines all the pharmacokinetic data on metoprolol from various accessible studies, which may assist in clinical decision making. METHODOLOGY: The Google Scholar and PubMed databases were searched to screen articles associated with the clinical pharmacokinetics of metoprolol. The comprehensive literature search retrieved 41 articles including data on plasma concentration-time profiles after intravenous and oral (immediate-release, controlled-release, slow-release, or extended-release) routes of administration, and at least one pharmacokinetic parameter was reported in all studies included. RESULTS: Out of 41 retrieved articles, six were after intravenous and 12 were after oral administration in healthy individuals. The oral studies depict a dose-dependent increase in maximum plasma concentration (C(max)), time to reach maximum plasma concentration (T(max)), and area under the concentration-time curve (AUC). Two studies were conducted in R- and S-enantiomers, in which one study reported the gender differences, depicting greater C(max) and AUC among women, whereas in another study S-metoprolol was found to have higher values of C(max), T(max), and AUC in comparison with R-metoprolol. Results in different diseases depicted that after IV administration of 20 mg, patients with renal impairment showed an increase in clearance (CL) (60 L/h vs 48 L/h) compared with healthy subjects, whereas a decrease in CL (36.6 +/- 7.8 L/h vs 48 +/- 6.6 L/h) was seen in patients with hepatic cirrhosis at a similar dose. In comparison with a single oral dose following administration of 15 mg IV in three divided doses, patients having an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) showed an increase in C(max) (823 nmol/L vs 248 nmol/L) at a steady state. Twenty different studies have reported significant changes in CL, C(max,) and AUC of metoprolol when it is co-administered with other drugs. One study has reported a drug-food interaction for metoprolol but no significant changes were seen in the C(max) and AUC. CONCLUSION: This review summarizes all the pharmacokinetic parameters of metoprolol after pooling up-to-date data from all the studies available. The summarized pharmacokinetic data presented in this review can assist in developing and evaluating pharmacokinetic models of metoprolol. Moreover, this data can provide practitioners with an insight into dosage adjustments among the diseased populations and can assist in preventing potential adverse drug reactions. This review can also help avoid side effects and drug-drug interactions.
BACKGROUND: Intravenous diltiazem and metoprolol are both commonly used to treat atrial fibrillation (AF) with rapid ventricular rate (RVR) in the emergency department (ED), but the advantages and disadvantages of these drugs cannot be verified. This meta-analysis aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of intravenous diltiazem versus metoprolol for AF with RVR. METHOD: We systematically searched PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, Cochrane library, the China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), Wanfang, China Biology Medicine disc (CBM) and the WeiPu (VIP). Meta-analysis was performed using weighted mean difference (WMD), relative risk (RR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). Statistical analysis was performed using Review Manager 5.4.1. RESULTS: Seventeen studies involving 1214 patients in nine randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and eight cohort studies were included in meta-analysis, including 643 patients in the intravenous diltiazem group and 571 patients group in the intravenous metoprolol. The results of the meta-analysis showed that compared with intravenous metoprolol, intravenous diltiazem was found higher efficacy (RR =1.11; 95% CI = 1.06 to 1.16, p < 0.00001), shorter average onset time (RR = -1.13; 95% CI = -1.97 to -0.28, p = 0.009), lower ventricular rate (RR = -9.48; 95% CI = -12.13 to -6.82, p<0.00001), less impact on systolic blood pressure (WMD = 3.76; 95% CI: 0.20 to 7.33, P = 0.04), and no significant difference in adverse events (RR = 0.80, 95% CI = 0.55 to 1.14, P = 0.22) and diastolic blood pressure (WMD = -1.20; 95% CI: -3.43 to 1.04, P = 0.29) was found between intravenous diltiazem and metoprolol. CONCLUSION: Intravenous diltiazem has higher efficacy, shorter average onset time, lower ventricular rate, less impact on blood pressure, and with no increase in adverse events compared to intravenous metoprolol.
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists are very popular agents in the treatment of hypertension. Reversible alopecia of the telogen effluvium variety has been described with propranolol (inderal). We describe a case of reversible alopecia with metoprolol (Lopressor) which also was associated with a telogen effluvium on scalp biopsy, suggesting a similar mechanism for the alopecia associated with these agents.
BACKGROUND: The use of beta-adrenergic receptor blocking agents in symptomatic patients with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) rests on clinical experience and observational cohort studies. OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate the effects of metoprolol on left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction, symptoms, and exercise capacity in patients with obstructive HCM. METHODS: This double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized crossover trial enrolled 29 patients with obstructive HCM and New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II or higher symptoms from May 2018 to September 2020. Patients received metoprolol or placebo for 2 consecutive 2-week periods in random order. The effect parameters were LVOT gradients, NYHA functional class, Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) angina class, Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire Overall Summary Score (KCCQ-OSS), and cardiopulmonary exercise testing. RESULTS: Compared with placebo, the LVOT gradient during metoprolol was lower at rest (25 mm Hg [interquartile range (IQR): 15-58 mm Hg] vs 72 mm Hg [IQR: 28-87 mm Hg]; P = 0.007), at peak exercise (28 mm Hg [IQR: 18-40 mm Hg] vs 62 mm Hg [IQR: 31-113 mm Hg]; P < 0.001), and postexercise (45 mm Hg [IQR: 24-100 mm Hg] vs 115 mm Hg [IQR: 55-171 mm Hg]; P < 0.0001). During metoprolol treatment, 14% of patients were in NYHA functional class III or higher compared with 38% of patients receiving placebo (P < 0.01). Similarly, no patients were in CCS class III or higher during metoprolol treatment compared with 10% during placebo treatment (P < 0.01). These findings were confirmed by higher KCCQ-OSS during metoprolol treatment (76.2 +/- 16.2 vs 73.8 +/- 19.5; P = 0.039). Measures of exercise capacity, peak oxygen consumption, and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide did not differ between the study arms. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, metoprolol reduced LVOT obstruction at rest and during exercise, provided symptom relief, and improved quality of life in patients with obstructive HCM. Maximum exercise capacity remained unchanged. (The Effect of Metoprolol in Patients with Hypertrophic Obstructive Cardiomyopathy [TEMPO]; NCT03532802).
AIMS: The aim of the present study was to evaluate the disposition of metoprolol after oral administration of an immediate and controlled-release formulation before and after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery in the same individuals and to validate a physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model for predicting oral bioavailability following RYGB. METHODS: A single-dose pharmacokinetic study of metoprolol tartrate 200 mg immediate release and controlled release was performed in 14 volunteers before and 6-8 months after RYGB. The observed data were compared with predicted results from the PBPK modelling and simulation of metoprolol tartrate immediate and controlled-release formulation before and after RYGB. RESULTS: After administration of metoprolol immediate and controlled release, no statistically significant difference in the observed area under the curve (AUC(0-24 h)) was shown, although a tendency towards an increased oral exposure could be observed as the AUC(0-24 h) was 32.4% [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.36, 63.5] and 55.9% (95% CI 5.73, 106) higher following RYGB for the immediate and controlled-release formulation, respectively. This could be explained by surgery-related weight loss and a reduced presystemic biotransformation in the proximal gastrointestinal tract. The PBPK values predicted by modelling and simulation were similar to the observed data, confirming its validity. CONCLUSIONS: The disposition of metoprolol from an immediate-release and a controlled-release formulation was not significantly altered after RYGB; there was a tendency to an increase, which was also predicted by PBPK modelling and simulation.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this article is to compare blood pressure (BP)-lowing effects of nitrendipine and hydrochlorothiazide and nitrendipine and metoprolol, and estimate the economic effect of these therapies on hypertension. METHODS: Outpatients (N = 793) 18-70 years of age with stage 2 or severe hypertension (SBP >/= 160 mmHg and/or DBP >/= 100 mmHg) were recruited from four randomly selected rural community health centers in Beijing and Jilin. After drug wash out, they were randomly divided into nitrendipine and hydrochlorothiazide group or nitrendipine and metoprolol group. The costs of drug treatment for hypertension were calculated and general estimation, whereas effectiveness was measured as a reduction in SBP and DBP at the end of a 24-week study period. RESULTS: Overall, 623 patients were eligible for the study and after a 24-week follow-up, SBP and DBP were 131.2/82.2 mmHg for the nitrendipine and hydrochlorothiazide group and 131.4/82.9 mmHg for the nitrendipine and metoprolol group and these were not significantly different (P = 0.7974 SBP and P = 0.1166 DBP). Comparing with nitrendipine and metoprolol, the cost of nitrendipine and hydrochlorothiazide was less, and its effectiveness was similar. The cost/effect ratio (US$/mmHg) was 1.4 for SBP and 2.8 for DBP for the nitrendipine and hydrochlorothiazide group, and 1.9 and 3.8 for the nitrendipine and metoprolol group's SBP and DBP values, respectively. The incremental cost per patient for achieving target BP was 5.1. Adverse events were mild or moderate and there were no differences between treatment groups. CONCLUSION: Treating hypertension with nitrendipine and hydrochlorothiazide was cost-effective than nitrendipine and metoprolol, and these data will allow more reasonable and efficient allocation of limited resources in low-income countries.
The aim of this study was to evaluate whether fingerprints are suitable to be applied as the biometric identification samples by testing the orally administered drugs needs to be taken daily. The dosage of BETALOC(R) was administered to subjects following single and multiple doses and its active ingredient metoprolol and its main metabolite alpha-hydroxyl metoprolol were selected as the analytes. The subjects washed their hands and pressed fingertips onto glass slides at fixed sampling points (from 1 h to 7 days), and the analytes were extracted using cotton swabs 30 times followed by ultrasonic assistance in 30℃ methanol solution for 5 min with working power of 2000 W after optimization. The drugs in blood were taken from their elbow vein and deproteinized before analysis. Analysis were performed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS), and their concentration time course in fingerprints and blood were evaluated and compared. Results showed that metoprolol was detected 1 h after ingestion both in fingerprints and blood, while alpha-hydroxyl metoprolol was detected from sampling points of 2 h in fingerprint and 3 h in blood, respectively. Drugs could be detected for longer periods in blood than in fingerprint in single dose administration. However, in multiple doses, they could reach a steady detectable state in fingerprints from the fifth day after oral administration, and could serve as a more rapid and simpler alternative for drug analysis. We demonstrate that fingerprints could be applied as the biometric identification samples for orally administered drugs in multiple-doses, and could be applied to drug testing in criminal investigations.
Metoprolol and its alpha-hydroxy metabolite were determined in plasma down to 2 nmol/l (S.D. 10-15%) after solvent extraction and bonded-phase liquid chromatography with fluorometric detection. The major metabolite with a carboxylic function was also measured in plasma when liquid-solid extraction on a column activated with dodecyl sulphate was applied. In urine the three components were assayed by direct injection of a diluted sample.
AIM: To investigate the influence of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) on the kinetic disposition and transplacental and amniotic fluid distribution of metoprolol and its metabolites O-desmethylmetoproloic acid and alpha-hydroxymetoprolol stereoisomers in hypertensive parturients receiving a single dose of the racemic drug. METHODS: The study was conducted on hypertensive parturients with well-controlled GDM (n = 11) and non-diabetic hypertensive parturients (n = 24), all receiving a single 100 mg oral dose of racemic metoprolol tartrate before delivery. Serial maternal blood samples (0-24 h) and umbilical blood and amniotic fluid samples were collected for the quantitation of metoprolol and its metabolite stereoisomers using LC-MS/MS or fluorescence detection. RESULTS: The kinetic disposition of metoprolol and its metabolites was stereoselective in the diabetic and control groups. Well-controlled GDM prolonged tmax for both enantiomers of metoprolol (1.5 vs. 2.5 h R-(+)-MET; 1.5 vs. 2.75 h S-(-)-MET) and O-desmethylmetoproloic acid (2.0 vs. 3.5 h R-(+)-AOMD; 2.0 vs. 3.0 h S-(-)-OAMD), and for the four stereoisomers of alpha-hydroxymetoprolol (2.0 vs. 3.0 h for 1'S,2R-, 1'R,2R- and 1'R,2S-OHM; 2.0 vs. 3.5 h for 1'S,2S-OHM) and reduced the transplacental distribution of 1'S,2S-, 1'R,2R-, and 1'R,2S-OHM by approximately 20%. CONCLUSIONS: The kinetic disposition of metoprolol was enantioselective, with plasma accumulation of the S-(-)-MET eutomer. Well-controlled GDM prolonged the tmax of metoprolol and O-desmethylmetoproloic acid enantiomers and the alpha-hydroxymetoprolol stereoisomers and reduced by about 20% the transplacental distribution of 1'S,2S-, 1'R,2R-, and 1'R,2S-OHM. Thus, well-controlled GDM did not change the activity of CYP2D6 and CYP3A involved in metoprolol metabolism.
During the intervening years since metoprolol was first reviewed in the Journal (1977), it has become widely used in the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension and angina pectoris. Although much data have accumulated, its precise mechanisms of action in these diseases remain largely uncertain. Optimum treatment of hypertension and angina pectoris with metoprolol is achieved through dose titration within the therapeutic range. It has been clearly demonstrated that metoprolol is at least as effective as other beta-blockers, diuretics and certain calcium antagonists in the majority of patients. Although a twice daily dosage regimen is normally used, satisfactory control can be maintained in many patients with single daily doses of conventional or, more frequently, slow release formulations. Addition of a diuretic may improve the overall response rate in hypertension. Several controlled trials have studied the effects of metoprolol administered during the acute phase and after myocardial infarction. In early intervention trials a reduction in total mortality was achieved in one moderately large trial of prolonged treatment, but in another, which excluded patients already being treated with beta-blockers or certain calcium antagonists and where treatment was only short term, mortality was significantly reduced only in 'high risk' patients. Overall results with metoprolol have not demonstrated that early intervention treatment in all patients produces clinically important improvement in short term mortality. Thus, the use of metoprolol during the early stages of myocardial infarction is controversial, largely because of the requirement to treat all patients to save a small number at 'high risk'. This blanket coverage approach to treatment may be more justified during the post-infarction follow-up phase since it has been shown that metoprolol slightly, but significantly, reduces the mortality rate for periods of up to 3 years. Metoprolol is generally well tolerated and its beta 1-selectivity may facilitate its administration to certain patients (e.g. asthmatics and diabetics) in whom non-selective beta-blockers are contraindicated. Temporary fatigue, dizziness and headache are among the most frequently reported side effects. After a decade of use, metoprolol is well established as a first choice drug in mild to moderate hypertension and stable angina, and is beneficial in post-infarction patients. Further study is needed in less well established areas of treatment such as cardiac arrhythmias, idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy and hypertensive cardiomegaly.
A rapid, specific and reliable isocratic high-performance liquid chromatography combined with quadrupole time-of-flight electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC/Q-TOF-ESI-MS/MS) method has been developed and validated for the identification and characterization of stressed degradation products of metoprolol. Metoprolol, an anti-hypertensive drug, was subjected to hydrolysis (acidic, alkaline and neutral), oxidation, photolysis and thermal stress, as per ICH-specified conditions. The drug showed extensive degradation under oxidative and hydrolysis (acid and base) stress conditions. However, it was stable to thermal, neutral and photolysis stress conditions. A total of 14 degradation products were observed and the chromatographic separation of the drug and its degradation products was achieved on a C(18) column (4.6 x 250 mm, 5 microm). To characterize degradation products, initially the mass spectral fragmentation pathway of the drug was established with the help of MS/MS, MS(n) and accurate mass measurements. Similarly, fragmentation pattern and accurate masses of the degradation products were established by subjecting them to LC-MS/QTOF analysis. Structure elucidation of degradation products was achieved by comparing their fragmentation pattern with that of the drug. The degradation products DP(2) (m/z 153) and DP(14) (m/z 236) were matched with impurity B, listed in European Pharmacopoeia and British Pharmacopoeia, and impurity I, respectively. The LC-MS method was validated with respect to specificity, linearity, accuracy and precision.
A double-blind, parallel-group multicentre study has been done to compare the antihypertensive properties, effects on serum lipoproteins and adverse effect profiles of diltiazem and metoprolol given as monotherapy to primary hypertensive patients. 128 patients were included from 10 participating centers. Following a placebo wash-out period of 5 weeks, patients were randomized either to diltiazem or metoprolol treatment according to a forced titration regimen. Each dose was given for a 4-week period in a stepwise regimen. A total of 119 patients, 59 and 60 in the two groups, completed the study. Supine and standing BPs were reduced in a similar, dose-dependent fashion by diltiazem and metoprolol. In the former supine BP fell from 161/101 to 151/91 mmHg at the highest dose level. In the latter patients, supine BP at the highest dose level was reduced from 161/102 to 155/94 mmHg. Target pressures (DBP less than or equal to 90 mmHg and/or DBP reduction of greater than or equal to 10%) were reached in 63% and 48% of the patients, respectively. HDL-cholesterol was increased in diltiazem-treated patients and decreased in those on metoprolol. Otherwise, serum lipoproteins did not differ significantly between treatments. The incidence and severity of dose-dependent adverse effects did not differ significantly between treatments, although moderate to distressing side effects were reported more commonly by metoprolol-treated patients. Ankle oedema and breathlessness tended to be more common on diltiazem therapy, while tiredness, increased sweating and sleep disturbances appeared to be experienced more frequently by metoprolol-treated patients.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Environmental quality standards (EQSs) for 3 pharmaceuticals in surface water were derived: carbamazepine (epilepsy), metoprolol (heart failure), and metformin (diabetes). In recent years, these pharmaceuticals have been detected frequently in Dutch surface waters. The proposed standards are based on ecotoxicity data from national and European authorization dossiers and additional information obtained from open literature. The methods used are in accordance with the methodology of the Water Framework Directive and national frameworks for risk limit derivation. Only the exposure route regarding direct ecotoxic effects on ecosystems could be taken into account for deriving EQSs. The exposure route of secondary poisoning of fish-eating animals was not triggered, and not enough data were available or accessible to derive an EQS for the exposure of humans due to consumption of fish. Monitoring data for surface waters worldwide show that the proposed quality standards for carbamazepine may be exceeded. It could be expected that when carbamazepine use increases or effluents are diluted less during dry seasons, standards will be exceeded more often.
