BACKGROUND AND AIMS: To examine the decongestive effect of the sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor dapagliflozin compared to the thiazide-like diuretic metolazone in patients hospitalized for heart failure and resistant to treatment with intravenous furosemide. METHODS AND RESULTS: A multi-centre, open-label, randomized, and active-comparator trial. Patients were randomized to dapagliflozin 10 mg once daily or metolazone 5-10 mg once daily for a 3-day treatment period, with follow-up for primary and secondary endpoints until day 5 (96 h). The primary endpoint was a diuretic effect, assessed by change in weight (kg). Secondary endpoints included a change in pulmonary congestion (lung ultrasound), loop diuretic efficiency (weight change per 40 mg of furosemide), and a volume assessment score. 61 patients were randomized. The mean (+/-standard deviation) cumulative dose of furosemide at 96 h was 977 (+/-492) mg in the dapagliflozin group and 704 (+/-428) mg in patients assigned to metolazone. The mean (+/-standard deviation) decrease in weight at 96 h was 3.0 (2.5) kg with dapagliflozin compared to 3.6 (2.0) kg with metolazone [mean difference 0.65, 95% confidence interval (CI) -0.12,1.41 kg; P = 0.11]. Loop diuretic efficiency was less with dapagliflozin than with metolazone [mean 0.15 (0.12) vs. 0.25 (0.19); difference -0.08, 95% CI -0.17,0.01 kg; P = 0.10]. Changes in pulmonary congestion and volume assessment score were similar between treatments. Decreases in plasma sodium and potassium and increases in urea and creatinine were smaller with dapagliflozin than with metolazone. Serious adverse events were similar between treatments. CONCLUSION: In patients with heart failure and loop diuretic resistance, dapagliflozin was not more effective at relieving congestion than metolazone. Patients assigned to dapagliflozin received a larger cumulative dose of furosemide but experienced less biochemical upset than those assigned to metolazone. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04860011.
Treatment of volume overload in the setting of acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF) is typically achieved through the use of loop diuretics. While they are highly effective, some patients may develop loop diuretic resistance. One strategy to overcome this scenario includes sequential nephron blockade with a thiazide-type diuretic; however, it is unknown which thiazide-type diuretic used in this setting is most effective. A systematic review and meta-analysis were performed to compare the efficacy and safety of chlorothiazide with metolazone as add-on therapy in the setting of loop diuretic resistance for the treatment of ADHF. Literature searches were conducted through PubMed, Google Scholar, and Science Direct from inception through February 2020 using the following search terms alone or in combination: metolazone, chlorothiazide, acute decompensated heart failure, loop diuretic, and urine output. All English-language prospective and retrospective trials and abstracts comparing metolazone to chlorothiazide for the treatment of ADHF were evaluated. Studies were included if they analyzed urine output for at least 24 hours in patients with ADHF. Meta-analysis was conducted to evaluate pooled effect size by using a random-effect model. Primary outcomes included net and total urine output. Secondary outcomes included commonly reported safety outcomes. Four studies comparing the use of metolazone to chlorothiazide as an adjunct to loop diuretics to treat ADHF were included in the evaluation. Metolazone was as effective as chlorothiazide to augment loop diuretic therapy in ADHF in most studies with no pooled difference in net or total urine output. However, there were notable differences in baseline loop diuretic dosing, ejection fraction, renal function, race, and endpoint timing across studies. Adverse effects were commonly observed and included electrolyte abnormalities, change in renal function, and hypotension but were comparable between groups. Metolazone is as effective as chlorothiazide as add-on to loop diuretics in treating ADHF without an increase in safety concerns.
The use of metolazone (Zaroxolyn), a new diuretic, in fifty-two African patients is described. The drug was found to be safe and moderately effective when used alone, but combined with frusemide it proved to be of great value in patients whose fluid retention was refractory to other diuretics.
INTRODUCTION: Limited data exist comparing the efficacy and safety of bumetanide- or metolazone-based diuretic regimens to furosemide in acute heart failure (HF). Our purpose was to evaluate the comparative effect on urine output (UO) and renal function between these regimens. METHODS: A retrospective study of hospitalized HF patients treated with continuous infusion furosemide (CIF), combination furosemide plus metolazone (F + M), or continuous infusion bumetanide (CIB). Primary end points were between regimen comparisons for change in mean hourly UO versus baseline and incidence of worsening renal function. RESULTS: Data on 242 patients with acute HF (age 58 +/- 12 years, 63% male, left ventricular ejection fraction 38% +/- 17%) were analyzed (160 CIF, 42 F + M, 40 CIB). The mean duration of diuretic regimens was 41 +/- 32 hours. Compared to baseline, all regimens increased mean hourly UO (P < .0001 for all), with greater increases with F + M (109 +/- 171 mL) and CIB (90 +/- 90 mL) compared to CIF (48 +/- 103 mL; P = .009). Incidence of worsening renal function was not different between regimens; however, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) tended to increase more with F + M (4.4 +/- 9.8 mg/dL) and CIB (4.3 +/- 9.7 mg/dL) than CIF (1.8 +/- 10.8 mg/dL), P = .09. The incidence of hyponatremia was higher with F + M and CIB. Differences in UO, BUN, and hyponatremia were retained in the subgroup analysis limited to patients with baseline serum creatinine <1.5 mg/dL, where renal function between the groups was not different. CONCLUSION: Compared to CIF, F + M or CIB was associated with greater increases in UO. No difference in the incidence of worsening renal function was found; however, electrolyte abnormalities may be more prevalent when furosemide is combined with metolazone or when bumetanide is used. These therapeutic differences warrant prospective study.
In various clinical situations a poor diuretic response to furosemide may be improved by the addition of metolazone. The mechanism of this additive effect is unclear. The purpose of the present investigation was to establish whether metolazone changes the pharmacokinetics of furosemide and by this mechanism enhances the diuretic effect. Eight volunteers were given an intravenous infusion of 4 mg h-1 of furosemide for 12 h. After 6 h 2.5 mg metolazone were administered orally. The addition of metolazone increased diuresis, urinary excretion of sodium and chloride (P less than 0.01), but decreased urinary excretion of calcium (P less than 0.01), while furosemide excretion remained unchanged. Total body clearance and renal clearance values of furosemide were similar before and after administration of metolazone. Our data confirm the additive diuretic effect of the combination treatment metolazone-furosemide and show for the first time a distinct hypocalciuric action of metolazone, similar to thiazides. Moreover metolazone does not affect the pharmacokinetics of furosemide.
Eighteen patients with hepatic cirrhosis or nephrotic syndrome and having edema and/or ascites were treated during successive periods with metolazone 5 to 40 mg/day, spironolactone 100 mg/day, and with both diuretics concurrently. Metolazone alone produced a marked diuresis, natriuresis, and weight loss in 8 patients. Spironolactone alone had little effect, but the addition of metolazone renewed diuresis and natriuresis and resulted in additional substantial weight losses in all patients responsive to metolazone alone. Concurrent spironolactone and metolazone also induced moderate diuretic effects in some patients who failed to respond to either drug alone. The drugs were well tolerated; the administration of spironolactone with metolazone prevented decreases in serum potassium, which had occurred during treatment with metolazone alone.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and safety of intravenous (IV) chlorothiazide versus oral metolazone when added to loop diuretics in patients with acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF) and loop diuretic resistance. DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study. SETTING: Large urban academic medical center. PATIENTS: Adults admitted with ADHF between 2005 and 2015 who had loop diuretic resistance, defined as administration of IV furosemide at a dose of 160 mg/day or higher (or an equivalent dose of IV bumetanide), during hospitalization, and who then received at least one dose of IV chlorothiazide (88 patients) or oral metolazone (89 patients) to augment diuresis. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The primary efficacy end point was a change in 24-hour net urine output (UOP) from before to after thiazide-type diuretic administration, and the study was designed to test for the noninferiority of metolazone. Safety end points included changes in renal function and electrolyte concentrations. The mean dose of IV loop diuretic therapy (in IV furosemide equivalents) at baseline (before thiazide-type diuretic administration) was higher in the chlorothiazide group (mean +/- SD 318.9 +/- 127.7 vs 268.4 +/- 97.6 mg/day in the metolazone group, p=0.004), but net UOP was similar (mean +/- SD 877.0 +/- 1189.0 ml in the chlorothiazide group vs 710.6 +/- 1145.9 ml in the metolazone group, p=0.344). Mean doses of chlorothiazide and metolazone were 491 +/- 282 mg and 5.8 +/- 3.5 mg, respectively. Following thiazide-type diuretic administration, net UOP improved to a similar degree (2274.6 +/- 1443.0 ml vs 2030.2 +/- 1725.0 ml in the chlorothiazide and metolazone groups, respectively, p=0.308). For the primary efficacy end point, metolazone met the threshold for noninferiority by producing a net UOP of 1319.6 +/- 1517.4 ml versus 1397.6 +/- 1370.7 ml for chlorothiazide (p=0.026 for noninferiority). No significant differences in renal function were observed between the groups. Although hypokalemia was more frequent in the chlorothiazide group (75% with chlorothiazide vs 60.7% with metolazone, p=0.045), no significant differences in the rates of severe hypokalemia or other electrolyte abnormalities were observed between the groups. CONCLUSION: Oral metolazone was noninferior to IV chlorothiazide for enhancing net UOP in patients with ADHF and loop diuretic resistance and was similarly safe with regard to renal function and electrolyte abnormalities. Given the significant cost disparity between the two agents, these findings suggest that oral metolazone may be considered a first-line option in this patient population.
In this study, a facile, rapid, and sensitive spectrofluorimetric method was evolved to analyse two antihypertensive drugs, namely, metolazone (MTZ) and valsartan (VST), in pharmaceutical and biological matrices. Both analytes exhibited intrinsic fluorescence activities which were significantly affected by environmental factors such as pH and solvent systems. However, simultaneous determination of MTZ and VST by conventional spectrofluorometry cannot be achieved simply because of the strong overlap between their fluorescence spectra. Thus, a combination of derivative and synchronous spectrofluorometry was conducted to overcome this dilemma. The proposed method relies on measurement of the first-order derivative of synchronous fluorescence intensity of the studied drugs at Deltalambda = 160 nm using 0.1 M acetic acid as the optimum solvent. The amplitudes of the first derivative synchronous fluorescence spectra of MTZ and VST were recorded at 236.0 nm (zero-crossing point of VST) and at 262.8 nm (zero-crossing point of MTZ) for simultaneous analysis of MTZ and VST, respectively. The fluorescent method was optimized efficiently to get the maximum selectivity and sensitivity by investigating different solvents, different buffer pHs, and different surfactants. The highest sensitivity and selectivity were achieved when 0.1 M acetic acid was used as a solvent. The method showed a linear concentration range of 10.0-100.0 ng mL(-1) and a limit of detection of <3.0 ng mL(-1) for each analyte. Statistical data analysis confirmed that no significant difference between the proposed spectrofluorometric method and the reference methods. The validity of the proposed spectrofluorometric method approved its suitability for quality control work. The proposed spectrofluorometric method was applied to assay the studied drugs in pharmaceutical dosage and in biological matrices with acceptable %recoveries and small RSD values.
A decreased response to the loop diuretic furosemide develops within a few doses in young infants. We tested the hypothesis that the use of the thiazide-like diuretic metolazone, in combination with furosemide, would inhibit water and electrolyte reabsorption and overcome pharmacologic tolerance to furosemide alone. Infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia of similar gestational and postnatal ages were randomly assigned to one of three groups. Group 1 (n = 6) received furosemide (1 mg/kg per dose) intravenously every 24 hours for a total of five doses. Group 2 (n = 8) received the same treatment as group 1, but in addition metolazone (0.2 mg/kg per dose) was given enterally with doses 3 and 4 of furosemide. Group 3 (n = 8) received metolazone (0.2 mg/kg per dose) enterally every 24 hours for five doses. Urine was collected before the first diuretic dose and throughout the study for determination of the urine flow rate; urinary excretion of sodium, chloride, and potassium; and creatinine clearance. Urinary flow rate and urinary sodium and chloride excretion increased after the first dose in all groups. In the infants treated with either furosemide or metolazone, urinary flow rate and urinary and chloride excretion returned to baseline values after the last three doses. In contrast, when furosemide was administered with metolazone, urinary flow rate and urinary excretion of sodium, chloride, and potassium were greater than the values for baseline and for the previous dose, as well as for the corresponding doses of furosemide in group 1 and metolazone in group 3. Tolerance to furosemide (group 1) and metolazone (group 3) appeared to be explained by compensatory increased sodium and chloride reabsorption without changes in creatinine clearance. We conclude that the administration of metolazone with furosemide enhances diuresis, natriuresis, and chloruresis and overcomes the rapid development of tolerance to furosemide in infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia by blocking the compensatory increase in renal sodium and chloride absorption.
Renin angiotensin system parameters and blood pressure (B.P.) were followed monthly in patients with essential hypertension on metolazone, 5 mg daily for three months and with added propranolol, 40 to 160 mg, for the subsequent three months. On metolazone alone at three months, sitting B.P. declined from 166/108 +/- 14/11 mm Hg to 145/98 +/- 14/9 mm Hg (P less than 0.005). Plasma renin activity (PRA) increased from 3.9 +/- ng/ml/hr to 10.4 +/- 8.6 ng/ml/hr (P less than 0.005); plasma angiotensinogen did not change. Venous blood angiotensin I and II levels (pg/ml) rose initially but returned toward control values. A significant decline in plasma renin substrate reactivity (PRSr) in index occurred. Propranolol addition caused further lowering of only systolic B.P. and predominantly in the standing position, more marked at one month (40 mg) than at three months (160 mg). No significant further changes were observed in any of the measured parameters of renin angiotensin system, except for a rise in PRSr index concomitant with B.P. elevation at three months. Metolazone-induced changes in B.P. showed significant correlations at three months with changes in PRSr index. It is concluded that during chronic metolazone administration, the overall activity of the renin angiotensin system was diminished or unchanged. Propranolol did not inhibit metolazone stimulated PRA but did cause further decline in B.P. in the first two months, unrelated to renin angiotensin system.
Metolazone is a potent thiazide-like diuretic. It is recommended in severe congestive heart failure (HF). We conducted a review of the existing literature and found that the available information on the use of metolazone in HF is based on studies containing less than 250 patients in total. Nevertheless, metolazone is widely used, often in combination with a loop diuretic. Absorption of metolazone seems to be reduced in HF. Metolazone produces a diuretic response despite a low glomerular filtration rate. A wide dose range of metolazone has been investigated (< or =2.5 to 200 mg), leaving no clear dosing recommendation. However, in most studies a low starting dose (< or =5 mg) was used. We further report an observational study on 21 patients with refractory systolic HF from our specialized outpatient HF clinic. The aim was to evaluate the effects of metolazone in combination with a loop diuretic in contemporary HF patients. RESULTS: We registered 42 episodes of treatment with metolazone. The maximal dose of metolazone was 5 mg. NYHA functional class improved. A significant reduction during treatment in weight, blood pressure, plasma-sodium and -potassium was seen whereas plasma-BUN and -creatinine increased significantly. Clinically important hypokalemia (<2.5 mM) or hyponatremia (<125 mM) were observed during 10% of the treatment episodes. CONCLUSION: The literature review and the observational study support the use of low-dose metolazone (< or =5 mg) on top of oral loop diuretics, as an effective and relatively safe treatment in contemporary outpatients with refractory HF.
Human pregnane X receptor (hPXR) regulates the expression of drug-metabolizing enzyme cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) and drug transporters such as multidrug-resistance protein 1 (MDR1). PXR can be modulated by small molecules, including Federal Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs, thus altering drug metabolism and causing drug-drug interactions. To determine the role of FDA-approved drugs in PXR-mediated regulation of drug metabolism and clearance, we screened 1481 FDA-approved small-molecule drugs by using a luciferase reporter assay in HEK293T cells and identified the diuretic drug metolazone as an activator of hPXR. Our data showed that metolazone activated hPXR-mediated expression of CYP3A4 and MDR1 in human hepatocytes and intestine cells and increased CYP3A4 promoter activity in various cell lines. Mammalian two-hybrid assays showed that hPXR recruits its co-activator SRC-1 upon metolazone binding in HepG2 cells, explaining the mechanism of hPXR activation. To understand the role of other commonly-used diuretics in hPXR activation and the structure-activity relationship of metolazone, thiazide and non-thiazide diuretics drugs were also tested but only metolazone activates hPXR. To understand the molecular mechanism, docking studies and mutational analysis were carried out and showed that metolazone binds in the ligand-binding pocket and interacts with mostly hydrophobic amino acid residues. This is the first report showing that metolazone activates hPXR. Because activation of hPXR might cause drug-drug interactions, metolazone should be used with caution for drug treatment in patients undergoing combination therapy.
Two robust and selective stability-indicating chromatographic methods were developed and validated for the determination of metolazone in drug substance and pharmaceutical dosage form in the presence of its degradation products. The HPLC method employed a Kromasil C18 (250 x 4.6,5 mum) column and a mobile phase of acetonitrile: 0.2% orthophosphoric acid (32:68 v/v) at a flow rate 2 mL/min and detection at 238 nm. The separation was performed in HPLC isocratic mode. The robustness of the suggested method was assessed using the Plackett-Burman design, parameters affecting system suitability were established and non-significant intervals for the significant parameters were considered. The HPTLC method employed Nano-SIL-20 UV254 HPTLC plates as adsorbent, ethyl acetate: toluene: acetic acid solution (4:4:0.5, v/v/v), as a developing solvent system and densitometric detection at 238 nm. Metolazone was exposed to different stress conditions, including acid and alkaline hydrolysis and oxidative and photolytic degradation. The main degradation products obtained have been characterized and interpreted based on LC-MS. The linearity of the suggested methods was proved in the concentration range of 20-75 mug/mL for the HPLC method and 100-900 ng/spot for the HPTLC method. The suggested methods were validated according to international conference on harmonization guidelines. These methods were successfully dedicated for the estimation of metolazone in drug substance and pharmaceutical dosage form in the presence of its degradation products. The results of the suggested methods were evaluated and compared statistically with results obtained by an official method without finding any significant difference.
A double-blind crossover comparison was made in 18 nonedematous hypertensive subjects with glomerular filtration rates exceeding 70 ml/min/1.73 m2 of the effects of 5 mg metolazone and 5 mg bendroflumethiazide on blood pressure and metabolic parameters. After a 4-wk run-in placebo period, patients received either metolazone or bendroflumethiazide for 6 wk in a crossover fashion with an intervening washout period of 4 wk. Metolazone induced a more sustained and greater blood pressure response than bendroflumethiazide. Changes in plasma potassium, urate, bicarbonate, renin, and angiotensin II occurred during treatment with both metolazone and bendroflumethiazide; the only significant difference, however, was in changes in plasma bicarbonate. Total body potassium (TBK), measured by whole-body monitor, did not fall outside the normal range with either metolazone or bendroflumethiazide, although metolazone induced a greater reduction in TBK (6.2 gm, 5.5% of TBK) than bendroflumethiazide (1.2 gm, 1.1% of TBK, p < 0.05). Our results suggest that metolazone is a more effective antihypertensive and induces similar but greater metabolic changes than bendroflumethiazide. The results of our comparison suggest that although changes in plasma potassium and TBK are minor, they are greater with metolazone, and potassium supplements may not be necessary in nonedematous hypertensive patients with normal renal function.
OBJECTIVE: To compare efficacy and safety of indapamide-furosemide combination against metolazone-furosemide combination in refractory heart failure patients. METHODS: The randomised controlled trial was conducted at Rehman Medical Institute, Peshawar, Pakistan, from January 1 to June 30, 2018, and comprised refractory heart failure patients who were randomised into two groups using lottery method Group 1 received intravenous furosemide 40mg Q12hr with metolazone 5mg Q24hr, while group 2 received intravenous furosemide 40mg Q12hr with indapamide 2.5mg Q24hr. Both groups were assessed for urinary sodium excretion, total urine output and decrease in weight on day one, day three and day five of admission. SPSS 22 was used for data analysis. RESULTS: Of the 150 patients, there were 75(50%) in each of the two groups. Mean age in group 1 was 64.811.2 years, while it was 66.312.9 years in group 2. Both groups showed increased urinary sodium excretion and total urine output (p>0.05). Hypokalaemia was the most common adverse event 66%. Mean hospital stay was not significantly different between the groups (p>0.05). CONCLUSIONS: There was no significant differences between adverse events and efficacy between patients receiving either indapamide-furosemide combination or metolazone-furosemide combination.
A new, specific and sensitive reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography method was developed for the simultaneous determination of metolazone (MET) and losartan potassium (LOS). Good chromatographic separation was achieved within 6.0 min on a 150 x 4.6 mm i.d., 5 microm Waters, Ireland and ProDIGY 5 ODS 3 100 A column. A mobile phase containing a mixture of methanol and 0.02 M phosphate buffer (65:35, v/v) at pH 3.0 was used. The analysis was performed at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with fluorescence detection at 410 nm after excitation at 230 nm. Aspirin (ASP) was used as an internal standard. The proposed method was rectilinear over 2.0-40.0 (MET) and 40.0-800.0 ng/mL (LOS), with limits of detection of 0.22 and 4.52 ng/mL and limits of quantification of 0.68 and 13.70 ng/mL for MET and LOS, respectively. The method was successfully applied for the simultaneous analysis of the studied drugs in their laboratory-prepared mixtures, single tablets and co-formulated tablets. Moreover, the method was applied to an in vitro drug release (dissolution) test. The method was further extended to the determination of LOS in spiked human plasma. Statistical evaluation and comparison of data obtained using the proposed and comparison methods revealed no significant difference between the two methods in addition to good accuracy and precision for the proposed method.
In 8 out of 20 patients with chronic liver disease ascites was controlled with metolazone, 10 required additional amiloride or spironolactone to achieve control, and 2 were resistant to all diuretic therapy. An initial dose of 5 mg daily is suggested, though much higher doses may be required ultimately. When metolazone is used alone the high incidence of hypokalaemia (80%), hypochloraemia (35%), and encephalopathy (35%) compared with the results of other series is a major disadvantage and indicates that this drug should be used with caution in patients with liver disease. Hypokalaemia can usually be prevented by the simultaneous administration of amiloride or spironolactone. The low incidence of azotaemia (5%) suggests that this diuretic may be useful if renal function is particularly impaired.
