Metronidazole is a highly effective therapy for anaerobic infections and a variety of protozoal and parasitic diseases. Its pharmacokinetics, toxicities, and unique mode of action are reviewed in detail. Indications for use and respective dosages are suggested.
New imidazole ring derivatives comprising 1,3-oxazoline, Schiff's bases, thiadiazole, oxadiazole and 1,2,4-triazole moieties are reported. 3-Aminobiimidazol-4-one compounds 7a-c were synthesized by the reaction of compounds 6a-c with hydrazine hydrate. Biimidazole esters 9a-c were converted into biimidazole hydrazide esters 10a-c. Compounds 7a-c and 10a-c were converted into a variety of derivatives.
Decreased effectiveness of metronidazole for the treatment of Clostridioides difficile infection has been documented. One reason for this is that levels of metronidazole in the colon are generally low; therefore, a modest increase in the minimum inhibitory concentration of metronidazole for C. difficile may result in an insufficient therapeutic concentration. Due to the lack of efficient genetic manipulation tools for C. difficile strains, the resistance mechanism is largely unknown. In this study, a metronidazole-resistant strain (SH182IR) was acquired by in-vitro induction with metronidazole from a clinical metronidazole-heteroresistant strain (SH182), and the genomic and transcriptional changes were investigated through whole-genome sequencing and RNA-seq. The morphology of the two strains was studied by transmission electron microscopy, and the roles of drug efflux pumps in metronidazole resistance were determined by inhibition assay. Genomic analysis showed that the ferrous iron transporter feoB3 was truncated in SH182IR, indicating that feoB3 contributed to the metronidazole resistance of C. difficile. RNA-seq analysis showed that genes involved in peptidoglycan synthesis, efflux pumps and metronidazole reductive action were expressed differentially between the two strains. Further cell imaging confirmed that cell wall thickness was significantly greater in SH182IR. The efflux pump inhibitor test showed that addition of reserpine or cyanide 3-chlorophenylhydrazone reduced metronidazole resistance in SH182IR, thus proving the role of efflux pumps in metronidazole resistance. These results found an association between genomic variation and metronidazole resistance in C. difficile, and show that metronidazole resistance in C. difficile is multi-factorial, involving metronidazole metabolism, cell wall thickness and efflux pumps. These findings will help improve knowledge and understanding of metronidazole resistance of C. difficile.
The antibiotic metronidazole (MNZ) has gained interest as a potential MRI contrast agent for imaging hypoxia. (15)N-labeled MNZ can be efficiently hyperpolarized via SABRE-SHEATH (Signal Amplification By Reversible Exchange in SHield Enables Alignment Transfer to Heteronuclei), but the envisioned MRI approach requires that MNZ rapidly undergoes structural changes in hypoxic environments with significant (15)N frequency differences manifested in its downstream metabolic products. We have performed NMR studies of the anticipated metabolic product amino-MNZ (despite anticipated stability concerns) accompanied by computational density functional theory (DFT) studies to predict the (15)N chemical shifts of different relevant species. Direct hyperpolarization of sparse naturally abundant (15)N spins in amino-MNZ via SABRE-SHEATH (enhancement up to  approximately 9400 fold), along with (1)H-decoupled (15)N NMR, allowed comparison with both (15)N(3)-MNZ and naturally abundant MNZ. The results show significant (15)N shift differences that agree with the DFT predictions. Taken together, the results show that it should be possible to readily distinguish the parent MNZ from product amino-MNZ in envisioned MRI approaches at clinically relevant magnetic fields.
COVID-19 patients have shown overexpressed serum levels of several pro-inflammatory cytokines, leading to a high mortality rate due to numerous complications. Also, previous studies demonstrated that the metronidazole (MTZ) administration reduced pro-inflammatory cytokines and improved the treatment outcomes for inflammatory disorders. However, the effect and mechanism of action of MTZ on cytokines have not been studied yet. Thus, the current study aimed to identify anti-cytokine therapeutics for the treatment of COVID-19 patients with cytokine storm. The interaction of MTZ with key cytokines was investigated using molecular docking studies. MTZ-analogues, and its structurally similar FDA-approved drugs were also virtually screened against interleukin-12 (IL-12). Moreover, their mechanism of inhibition regarding IL-12 binding to IL-12 receptor was investigated by measuring the change in volume and area. IL-12-metronidazole complex is found to be more stable than all other cytokines under study. Our study also revealed that the active sites of IL-12 are inhibited from binding to its target, IL-12 receptor, by modifying the position of the methyl and hydroxyl functional groups in MTZ. Three MTZ analogues, metronidazole phosphate, metronidazole benzoate, 1-[1-(2-Hydroxyethyl)-5-nitroimidazol-2-yl]-N-methylmethanimine-oxide, and two FDA-approved drugs acyclovir (ACV), and tetrahydrobiopterin (THB) were also found to prevent binding of IL-12 to IL-12 receptor similar to MTZ by changing the surface and volume of IL-12 upon IL-12-drug/ligand complex formation. According to the RMSD results, after 100 ns MD simulations of human IL-12-MTZ/ACV/THB drug complexes, it was also observed that each complex was swinging within a few A compared to their corresponding docking poses, indicating that the docking poses were reliable. The current study demonstrates that three FDA-approved drugs, namely, metronidazole, acyclovir and tetrahydrobiopterin, are potential repurposable treatment options for overexpressed serum cytokines found in COVID-19 patients. Similar approach is also useful to develop therapeutics against other human disorders.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.
We prepared a series of 10 carbamates derivatives based on two common antiprotozoal drugs: metronidazole (1-5) and secnidazole (6-10). The compounds were tested in vitro against a set of two amitochondriate protozoa: Giardia duodenalis and Trichomonas vaginalis. Compounds 1-10 showed strong antiprotozoal activities, with potency values in the low micromolar-to-nanomolar range, being more active than their parent drugs. Metronidazole carbamate (1) was the most active of the series, with nanomolar activities against G. duodenalis (IC(50) = 460 nM) and T. vaginalis (IC(50) = 60 nM). The potency of compound 1 was 10 times greater than that of metronidazole against both parasites. None of compounds showed in vitro cytotoxicity against VERO cells tested at 100 microM. Molecular dynamics of compounds 1-10, secnidazole, and metronidazole onto the ligand binding site of pyruvate-ferredoxin oxidoreductase of T. vaginalis and the modeled -tubulin of G. duodenalis revealed putative molecular interactions with key residues in the binding site of both proteins implicated in the mode of action of the parent drugs.
The purpose of this study is to formulate and develop tablets dosage form containing Metronidazole which has swelling and floating properties as a gastroretentive controlled-release drug delivery system to improve drug bioavailability. Fifteen different formulations of effervescence-forming floating systems were designed using HPMC K15M, xanthan gum, co-povidone, Eudragit(R) RL PO, pluronic(R) F-127 and/or polypropylene foam powder as swelling agents and sodium bicarbonate with/ without citric acid as gas-forming agents at different compositions. Six out of these 15 formulations which have satisfactory tablet floating behaviour were further studied with the incorporation of Metronidazole. The tablets were evaluated based on tablet physicochemical properties, floating behaviour, swelling ability and drug dissolution studies which were carried out using 0.1M HCl at 37 degrees C for 8 hours. Furthermore, evaluation of the powder mixtures using Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) were investigated. Most of the tablets show good physicochemical properties except for F11 which contains pluronic(R) F-127 as its release-retarding matrix-forming polymer. Other formulations show high swelling capacity, ability to float for at least 8 hours in vitro and have sustained drug release characteristics. Data obtained indicated that F3 which contains HPMC (12.5%w/w), xanthan gum (25%w/w), co-povidone (12.5%w/w) and sodium bicarbonate (31.7%w/w) is a suitable formulation with short floating lag time, good floating behaviour and sustained drug release for at least 8 hours in vitro with a zero order kinetic. Combinations of HPMC K15M and xanthan gum as swelling agents show synergistic effect in retarding drug release and are suitable in providing the most sustained drug release system.
Metronidazole (MNZ), an antibiotic that is specifically used for the treatment of anaerobic infections, may inhibit anaerobic fermentation. This work was designed to understand the fate and effects of MNZ in mesophilic fermentation (MF) and thermophilic fermentation (TF), respectively. The results showed that the removal of MNZ mainly occurred via biodegradation, rather than adsorption, and that MNZ could be completely degraded by opening the imidazole ring. MFs were more strongly inhibited by MNZ than TFs. MNZ concentration increased from 0 to 25 mg/L, hydrogen yield (HY) decreased from 167.5 to 16.8 mL/g glucose (90.0% decrease), and butyrate yield almost completely disappeared in MFs, whereas in TFs, HY decreased only from 101.1 to 89.3 mL/g glucose (11.7% decrease), and ethanol yield increased by 39.8%. Illumina MiSeq sequencing analysis showed that MNZ reduced the abundance of hydrogen-producing bacteria. Furthermore, the inhibition of MNZ on anaerobic fermentation was reversible.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine the pharmacokinetic profile of metronidazole (Mtz) tablet and to compare Mtz gel and tablet concentrations in both blood plasma and saliva. METHODS: In this randomized cross-over study with a 1-week washout period, 13 volunteers randomly received one (a single oral dose of 750 mg Mtz (Flagyl(R)--tablet) and 2) 3 g of 15% Mtz benzoate gel (applied by using a dental tray). The HPLC with ultraviolet detection was used to quantify plasma and saliva concentrations of Mtz. The pharmacokinetic parameters (PPs) areas under the curves from 0 to 48 h (AUC0-48) and from 0 to infinity (AUC0-infinity), the maximum plasma concentration (C(max)), the time to C(max), volume of distribution and renal clearance were determined for Mtz tablet. KEY FINDINGS: Considering the Mtz tablet, plasma showed higher Mtz concentration from 6 to 24 h after drug administration and the highest values concerning AUC0-48 h and AUC0-infinity than those obtained in saliva (P < 0.05). No significant differences were observed between plasma and saliva concentrations for Mtz gel. CONCLUSIONS: The study showed that some PPs were higher in plasma (P < 0.05) than in saliva concerning Mtz tablet. Gel formulation had similar Mtz bioavailability in plasma and saliva resulting in systemic absorption.
Two series of metronidazole derivatives (ester derivatives and ether derivatives) were prepared reacting metronidazole and its acetic acid oxidized form with menthol, thymol, carvacrol, and eugenol. Both series of compounds were tested in vitro against two strains of Helicobacter pylori (the ATCC 26695 and P12), and one strain of Clostridium (Clostridium perfringens). Most of the prepared compounds showed biological activity against the targeted bacteria. Compound 11 was highly active against all tested bacterial strains, especially against P12 with IC(50) 0.0011 muM/ml. Compound 6 was highly active against C. perfringens with MIC 0.0094 nM/ml. Viability test was conducted for compound 11 to test its selectivity for normal human fetal lung fibroblasts (MRC5), and it was found to be non-toxic with IC(50) more than 50 muM/ml.
HistoryAn 11-year-old boy taking oral antibiotics for Fusobacterium meningitis diagnosed 3 months earlier presented to the emergency department with a 1-week history of intermittent emesis, dizziness, and vertigo and a 1-day history of wobbly gait and bilateral lower extremity paresthesia without confusion. His metabolic profile was normal. Contrast material-enhanced MRI of the brain was performed.
In order to assess the amounts of metronidazole and its clearance in suckling neonates whose mothers received the drug in therapeutic doses, we measured its levels in maternal plasma and milk and in infant plasma. Eleven mothers receiving 600 mg metronidazole daily and 4 receiving 1200 mg and their 15 infants had milk and plasma levels determined with a specific semi-micro high-pressure liquid chromatographic method. Maternal mean plasma levels were 5.0 micrograms/ml, range 1.0 - 11.6 micrograms/ml (600 mg/day) and 12.5 micrograms/ml range 3.7 - 17.9 micrograms/ml (1200 mg/day) and corresponding infant plasma levels were 0.8 micrograms/ml, range 0.3 - 1.4 micrograms/ml and 2.4 micrograms/ml, range 0.6 - 4.9 micrograms/ml. Maternal milk/plasma ratio was 1 and baby/mother plasma ratio was 0.15, independent of dosage (Tab. I). The levels of metronidazole hydroxy metabolite (I) were all below those of metronidazole (Tab. II). Simultaneous milk and blood samples showed almost identical levels (Tab. III). Infant total clearance of metronidazole was calculated to be ca. 60% of maternal clearance by body weight and 24% by body surface, independent of dosage, while maximum infant metronidazole intake was estimated to be 3.0 mg/kg/day assuming a daily intake of 500 ml milk. It is recommended to avoid simultaneous breastfeeding and metronidazole therapy until possible harmful longterm effects on the neonates are known.
Chromosomal resistance to metronidazole has emerged in clinical Clostridioides difficile isolates, but the genetic mechanisms remain unclear. This is further hindered by the inability to generate spontaneous metronidazole-resistant mutants in the lab to interpret genetic variations in clinical isolates. We therefore constructed a mismatch repair mutator in nontoxigenic ATCC 700057 to survey the mutational landscape for de novo resistance mechanisms. In separate experimental evolutions, the mutator adopted a deterministic path to resistance, with truncation of the ferrous iron transporter FeoB1 as a first-step mechanism of low-level resistance. Deletion of feoB1 in ATCC 700057 reduced the intracellular iron content, appearing to shift cells toward flavodoxin-mediated oxidoreductase reactions, which are less favorable for metronidazole's cellular action. Higher-level resistance evolved from sequential acquisition of mutations to catalytic domains of pyruvate-ferredoxin/flavodoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR; encoded by nifJ), a synonymous codon change to putative xdh (xanthine dehydrogenase; encoded by CD630_31770), likely affecting mRNA stability, and last, frameshift and point mutations that inactivated the iron-sulfur cluster regulator (IscR). Gene silencing of nifJ, xdh, or iscR with catalytically dead Cas9 revealed that resistance involving these genes occurred only when feoB1 was inactivated; i.e., resistance was seen only in the feoB1 deletion mutant and not in the isogenic wild-type (WT) parent. Interestingly, metronidazole resistance in C. difficile infection (CDI)-associated strains carrying mutations in nifJ was reduced upon gene complementation. This observation supports the idea that mutation in PFOR is one mechanism of metronidazole resistance in clinical strains. Our findings indicate that metronidazole resistance in C. difficile is complex, involving multigenetic mechanisms that could intersect with iron-dependent and oxidoreductive metabolic pathways.
Nitroimidazoles (metronidazole [MTZ] and tinidazole [TNZ]) are the only drugs recommended for treatment of Trichomonas vaginalis infections. MTZ resistance occurs in 4% to 10% of cases of vaginal trichomoniasis (R. D. Kirkcaldy et al., Emerg Infect Dis 18:939-943, 2012; J. R. Schwebke and F. J. Barrientes, Antimicrob Agents Chemother 50:4209-4210, 2006) and TNZ resistance in 1% of cases (J. R. Schwebke and F. J. Barrientes, Antimicrob Agents Chemother 50:4209-4210, 2006). Emerging nitroimidazole-resistant trichomoniasis is concerning, because few alternatives to standard therapy exist. We assessed the prevalence of in vitro aerobic MTZ and secnidazole resistance among T. vaginalis isolates collected in 2015 to 2016 from 100 women in Birmingham, Alabama, with positive cultures. Archived specimens were treated with secnidazole or MTZ (0.2 to 400 mug/ml) for 48 h, according to U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention protocols. Ninety-six (96%) of the 100 clinical Trichomonas isolates tested demonstrated lower minimum lethal concentrations for secnidazole than for MTZ, suggesting that secnidazole has better in vitro activity than MTZ.
Sixty-four consecutive patients appendicectomized for perforated appendicitis were studied retrospectively to assess the effect of peroperative metronidazolee on postoperative infections. All patients were given antibiotics against aerobic organism. The infection rate in patients receiving metronidazol peroperative was 3%. It is concluded that the effect of peroperative administrated metronidazole in prevention of postoperative infections after perforated appendicitis is as good as previously demonstrated for preoperative administrated. Consequently metronidazole treatment can be restricted to peroperative proven high risk patients with perforated and perhaps gangrenous appendicitis.
