OBJECTIVE: Midodrine has been reported to improve systemic and renal hemodynamics in patients with cirrhotic ascites. However, the results of clinical trials are conflicting. The aim of this study is to evaluate the effects of midodrine on cirrhotic ascites through a meta-analysis and systematic review. METHODS: We searched PubMed (January 1966-December 2014), EMBASE (January 1966-December 2014), the Cochrane Library (Issue 11, 2014), ScienceDirect (January 1966-December 2014), and the China National Knowledge Infrastructure (January 1979-December 2014) databases using the terms 'midodrine' AND 'cirrhosis' AND 'ascites' AND 'paracentesis' for all relevant randomized controlled trials using midodrine for treatment of cirrhotic ascites. RESULTS: In all, 10 trials with a total of 462 patients were included. As a novel therapy for cirrhotic ascites, midodrine was not found to improve survival [odds ratio (OR) 0.81, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.23-2.91]; although it might improve response rates (OR 3.36, 95% CI 1.47-7.69) and reduce plasma renin activity (MD -3.10, 95% CI -5.37 to -0.84). When midodrine was used as an alternative to albumin in large-volume paracentesis, the mortality was higher for midodrine than for albumin (OR 10.76, 95% CI 1.35-85.97). However, there was no statistically significant difference in the development of paracentesis-induced circulatory dysfunction between midodrine group and albumin group (OR 1.69, 95% CI 0.43-6.72). CONCLUSIONS: Midodrine may have treatment effects on cirrhotic ascites. Better powered and well-designed trials are required to assess the extent of the efficacy of midodrine in specifically targeted patients.
BACKGROUND: Vasodilatation and bacterial dislocation are the main contributors to the catastrophic events in patients with decompensated liver cirrhosis (DLC). AIM: The aim of this study was to evaluate the impacts of adding midodrine and rifaximin on morbidity, mortality, and quality of life in patients with DLC. METHODS: This interventional clinical study included 100 consecutively enrolled DLC patients randomized 1 : 1 into two groups. Group A received oral midodrine (5 mg/8 h) and rifaximin (550 mg/12 h) with standard diuretic therapy, while group B received only standard diuretic therapy. Clinical and laboratory data, including the McGill Quality of Life Questionnaire, were evaluated over a 3-month treatment period. RESULTS: In the study group, there was a significant reduction in Child-Pugh and Model for End-Stage Liver Disease scores, international normalized ratio, and mean arterial blood pressure at 2, 6, and 12 weeks (P < 0.05). Ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis incidence, hematemesis, paracentesis need, and hepatic encephalopathy showed improvement after 12 weeks compared with the control group. McGill Quality of Life Questionnaire significantly improved after 6 and 12 weeks (P < 0.05). Survival rates demonstrated a noteworthy improvement (P = 0.014), substantiated by evidence in both univariate and multivariate regression analyses. CONCLUSION: Combined midodrine with rifaximin represents an endowment to patients with DLC with spectacular improvements in synthetic liver functions, along with improved quality of life, and survival.
OBJECTIVES: Midodrine, an oral alpha-1-adrenergic receptor agonist, counters arterial hypovolemia and reduces complications in adult patients with cirrhosis. This randomized controlled trial (RCT) aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of midodrine in preventing complications and improving survival in children with cirrhosis and ascites who are awaiting liver transplantation (LT). METHODS: This open-label RCT conducted from January 2022 to May 2023 included children under 18 years with cirrhosis and ascites. Patients were randomized to receive either midodrine plus standard medical therapies (SMTs) or SMT alone. The primary outcome measure was the incidence of cirrhosis-related complications within 6 months. RESULTS: Thirty-five subjects were enrolled and randomized. Patients in the midodrine arm had a lower incidence of new-onset acute kidney injury (AKI) compared with the SMT arm (11.1% vs. 41.2%). Patients in the midodrine arm showed a decline in serum creatinine and improvement in glomerular filtration rate, whereas no changes were observed in the SMT arm. There was a lower incidence of new-onset hyponatremia in the midodrine arm (20% vs. 56%). Midodrine led to reduction in plasma rennin activity (PRA) and improvement in systemic hemodynamics. There was no difference in the rate of resolution of ascites, recurrence of ascites, requirement of therapeutic paracentesis, cumulative albumin infusion requirement, episodes of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, and hepatic encephalopathy between the two arms. CONCLUSION: Midodrine, when added to SMT, was effective in reducing the incidence of new-onset AKI and hyponatremia in pediatric cirrhotics awaiting LT. It also improved systemic hemodynamics and showed a trend towards reducing PRA.
STUDY DESIGN: A report of two cases of orthostatic hypotension in acute tetraplegia that were resistant to classic treatment interventions. OBJECTIVE: To discuss the use of midodrine hydrochloride for the treatment of orthostatic hypotension in early tetraplegia. SETTING: Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, Texas, USA. METHODS: Presentation of two cases. RESULTS: Midodrine hydrochloride successfully treated two cases of orthostatic hypotension that had been refractory to classic treatment interventions. CONCLUSION: Midodrine hydrochloride should be included in the armamentarium of the physician treating orthostatic hypotension in spinal cord injury.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the long-term (for up to 3 months) efficacy and safety of single or combined therapy with midodrine and pyridostigmine for neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (OH). METHODS: This was a randomized, open-label clinical trial. In total, 87 patients with symptomatic neurogenic OH were enrolled and randomized to receive 1 of 3 treatments: midodrine only, pyridostigmine only, or midodrine + pyridostigmine. The patients were followed up at 1 and 3 months after treatment. The primary outcome measures were improvement in orthostatic blood pressure (BP) drop at 3 months. Secondary endpoints were improvement of the orthostatic BP drop at 1 month and amelioration of the questionnaire score evaluating OH-associated symptoms. RESULTS: Orthostatic systolic and diastolic BP drops improved significantly at 3 months after treatment in all treatment groups. Orthostatic symptoms were significantly ameliorated during the 3-month treatment, and the symptom severity was as follows: midodrine only < midodrine + pyridostigmine < pyridostigmine only group. Mild to moderate adverse events were reported by 11.5% of the patients. CONCLUSIONS: Single or combination treatment with midodrine and pyridostigmine was effective and safe in patients with OH for up to 3 months. Midodrine was better than pyridostigmine at improving OH-related symptoms. CLINICALTRIALSGOV IDENTIFIER: NCT02308124. CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class IV evidence that for patients with neurogenic OH, long-term treatment with midodrine alone, pyridostigmine alone, or both midodrine and pyridostigmine is safe and has similar effects in improving orthostatic BP drop up to 3 months.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the effects of midodrine in addition to intravenous vasopressor therapy on outcomes in adults recovering from shock. MATERIALS AND METHODS: PubMed, Scopus, Clinicaltrials.gov, and published abstracts were searched from inception to November 2018 for studies comparing outcomes in shock after midodrine initiation versus no midodrine. RESULTS: Three studies with 2533 patients were included. Patients in whom midodrine was added to intravenous vasopressor therapy compared to intravenous vasopressor therapy alone experienced similar intensive care unit (ICU; mean difference [MD]: 1.38 days, 95% confidence interval [CI]: -3.48 to 6.23, I(2) = 93%) and hospital lengths of stay (MD: 4.37 days, 95% CI: -3.45 to 12.19, I(2) = 93%) and intravenous vasopressor duration after midodrine initiation (MD: 7.28 days, 95% CI: -0.86 to 15.41, I(2) = 97%). Mortality was similar between groups (odds ratio: 0.74, 95% CI: 0.44-1.27, I(2) = 65%). Qualitative assessment of reporting biases revealed minimal location bias, moderate selective outcome reporting bias, no selective analysis reporting bias, and no conflict of interest bias. CONCLUSIONS: Midodrine had no effect on ICU or hospital length of stay. These results were highly susceptible to the study heterogeneity and availability. Future investigation into standardized initiation of midodrine at an adequate dosage with an expedited titration strategy is needed in order to assess the utility of this strategy in shock management.
The question of this review is: what is the effectiveness of droxidopa compared to midodrine on standing blood pressure and orthostatic intolerance symptoms in adults with neurogenic orthostatic hypotension?
BACKGROUND: Splanchnic arterial vasodilatation and subsequent sodium and water retention play an important role in cirrhotic ascites. Midodrine and tolvaptan have been used separately in these patients. However, there are no reports on the use of combination of midodrine and tolvaptan in the control of ascites. The aim of this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of midodrine, tolvaptan and their combination in control of refractory or recurrent ascites in cirrhotics. METHODS: Fifty cirrhotic patients with refractory or recurrent ascites were randomised to receive midodrine (n=13), tolvaptan (n=12) or both (n=13) plus standard medical therapy (SMT) or SMT alone (n=12). RESULTS: A significant increase in urinary volume and urinary sodium at 1 and 3 months (P<.05) was observed in all groups except SMT. There was no worsening of renal or hepatic function in any group. There was deterioration of model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) in SMT. Midodrine as well as combination of midodrine and tolvaptan but not tolvaptan alone was superior to SMT in control of ascites at 3 months (P<.05). The combination therapy was also superior to midodrine in the control of ascites at 1 month. The morbidity and mortality were similar in all the groups except SMT. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this pilot study suggest that midodrine and combination with tolvaptan better controls ascites without any renal or hepatic dysfunction. The combination therapy rapidly controls ascites as compared to midodrine or tolvaptan alone.
BACKGROUND: Dialysis-induced hypotension is an important complication of haemodialysis. Midodrine is an oral alpha-1 agonist that has been used in several small studies to prevent intradialytic hypotension (IDH). METHODS: The authors searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, ASN conference proceedings, and references of potentially relevant articles, and contacted industry (Shire Pharmaceuticals) for unpublished data. Observational studies, randomized controlled trials, crossover studies and pre- and post-intervention design studies with >/=5 haemodialysis patients were included. Study outcomes assessed were: hypotensive symptoms, changes in systolic and/or diastolic blood pressure, dry weight and length of stay after treatment. Data were abstracted on: study design, patient characteristics, intradialytic changes in blood pressure, nadir blood pressure and symptom improvement with midodrine. Thirty-seven full text articles were retrieved and nine met the selection criteria, in addition to one unpublished study. Midodrine dosing regimens ranged from 2.5 to 10 mg of midodrine given 15-30 min before dialysis. RESULTS: Post-dialysis systolic blood pressure was higher by 12.4 mmHg [95% confidence interval (CI) 7.5-17.7] and diastolic pressure was higher by 7.3 mmHg (95% CI 3.7-10.9) during midodrine treatment vs control. Likewise, the nadir systolic blood pressure was higher by 13.3 mmHg (95% CI 8.6-18.0), with a difference in nadir diastolic pressure of 5.9 mmHg (95% CI 2.7-9.1). Six of 10 studies report improvement in symptoms of IDH, and there were no reported serious adverse events ascribed to midodrine. CONCLUSIONS: This systematic review would suggest that midodrine has a role in the therapy of haemodialysis patients experiencing IDH. This conclusion must be viewed with caution, however, given the quality and sample size of the studies included in this review.
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS), a serious complication of cirrhosis, is associated with high mortality without treatment. Terlipressin with albumin is effective in the reversal of HRS. Where terlipressin is not available, as in the United States, midodrine and octreotide with albumin are used as an alternative treatment of HRS. The aim was to compare the effectiveness of terlipressin plus albumin versus midodrine and octreotide plus albumin in the treatment of HRS in a randomized controlled trial. Twenty-seven patients were randomized to receive terlipressin with albumin (TERLI group) and 22 to receive midodrine and octreotide plus albumin (MID/OCT group). The TERLI group received terlipressin by intravenous infusion, initially 3 mg/24 hours, progressively increased to 12 mg/24 hours if there was no response. The MID/OCT group received midodrine orally at an initial dose of 7.5 mg thrice daily, with the dose increased to a maximum of 12.5 mg thrice daily, together with octreotide subcutaneously: initial dose 100 mug thrice daily and up to 200 mug thrice daily. Both groups received albumin intravenously 1 g/kg of body weight on day 1 and 20-40 g/day thereafter. There was a significantly higher rate of recovery of renal function in the TERLI group (19/27, 70.4%) compared to the MID/OCT group (6/21, 28.6%), P = 0.01. Improvement in renal function and lower baseline Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score were associated with better survival. CONCLUSION: Terlipressin plus albumin is significantly more effective than midodrine and octreotide plus albumin in improving renal function in patients with HRS.
BACKGROUND: Acute kidney injury (AKI) in a patient with cirrhosis has high short-term mortality. Midodrine has shown promising results in the treatment of AKI-hepatorenal syndrome (HRS-AKI). AIMS: To compare midodrine and albumin versus albumin alone for the secondary prophylaxis of HRS-AKI. PATIENTS AND METHOD: Open labeled, nonrandomized, pilot study. Patients with a diagnosis of HRS-AKI were recruited after complete recovery. Patients were given midodrine daily (15 mg) and injection albumin infusion 20 g weekly in group-A (Gp-A) and injection albumin 20 g weekly with no midodrine in group-B (Gp-B). The primary endpoint was the recurrence of AKI-HRS, and the secondary endpoint was ascites tap in 2-month period. RESULTS: A total of 42 patients were enrolled in Gp-A, n = 22, and Gp-B, n = 20. There was no significant difference between the groups (Gp-A vs. Gp-B) in terms of age, model stage liver disease, Child-Turcotte-Pugh score and serum creatinine at inclusion (1.27 +/- 0.1 vs. 1.22 +/- 0.2 mg/dL). During follow up ten patients (50%) in Gp-B and four patients (18%) in Gp-A develop HRS-AKI (P = 0.04). The mean number of ascites tap was significantly higher in Gp-B compared to Gp-A (2.6 +/- 0.5 vs. 1.9 +/- 0.5) in 2 months. There was a significant increase in mean arterial pressure in Gp-A compared to Gp-B on days 7, 15, 30, 45 and 60. There was a significant difference in mean arterial pressure at day 7 in patients who developed HRS-AKI versus those who did not develop HRS-AKI [(n = 14, 65.5 +/- 5.5) vs. (n = 28,74.6 +/- 9.2 mm Hg), P = 0.02]. CONCLUSIONS: Midodrine along with albumin infusion, is helpful in the secondary prophylaxis of HRS-AKI and reduces the number of ascites tap. However, a large randomized study is required for further validation.
The objective of this case is to describe the pharmacokinetics and toxicity of midodrine in overdose. A 20 year old female ingested up to 350 mg midodrine while recovering in hospital from another overdose. She developed vomiting and severe hypertension (blood pressure [BP], 210/100 mmHg). Remarkable findings included a heart rate with a range of 43-60 beats/min, spontaneous respirations (20 breaths/min), and oxygen saturations of >95 % on FiO2 25 %, and a GS of 8. She was admitted to intensive care and had a normal non-contrast CT brain. She was treated with a glyceryl trinitrate patch (5 mg) and observed for 36 h with subsequent BP reduction to 124/81 mmHg and improved in conscious state. Midodrine and desglymidodrine concentrations were measured with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and were detected with 2-h post-ingestion at concentrations of 158.4 and 169.7 ng/mL, respectively. The parent drug concentrations rapidly decreased with an elimination of half-life of 1.6 h, and the metabolite initially increased and then decreased. The peak in blood pressure appeared to coincide with peak metabolite concentrations. Midodrine in overdose can potentially cause severe hypertension and reflex bradycardia but given its short half-life treatment with vasodilator agents and supportive care is sufficient.
A simple, rapid and selective thin layer chromatographic method has been developed for estimation of the antihypotension drug, midodrine hydrochloride, in pure form, tablet, spiked plasma and artificially degraded samples. Separation was carried out using silica gel 60-F(254) as a stationary and mobile phase consisting of methanol: methylene chloride: ammonia in ratio of 8:2:0.2. The detection was carried out at wavelength of 290 nm. The retardation factor was found to be 0.7 and 0.49 for midodrine and its main degradation product desglymidodrine. The method showed linearity for midodrine over a concentration range of 50-1500 ng/spot with good correlation and determination coefficient. The method was applied successfully for analysis of commercial tablets and oral drops with good recovery and without interference of excipients. The method also was applied for studying the stability of the cited drug under different stress conditions including acidic, alkaline, hydrolytic, oxidative and photo- degradations. Furthermore, the kinetic of acidic and alkaline degradations was investigated and the rate constants were found to be 0.620 and 0.074 K h(-1) while half life time (t(1/2)) values were 1.12 and 9.32 h, respectively.
BACKGROUND: The cornerstone of the treatment of vasovagal syncope (VVS) is lifestyle modifications; however, some patients incur life-disturbing attacks despite compliance with these treatments which underscores the importance of pharmacological interventions. METHODS: In this open-label multi-center randomized controlled trial, we are going to randomize 1375 patients with VVS who had >/=2 syncopal episodes in the last year into three parallel arms with a 2:2:1 ratio to receive midodrine, fludrocortisone, or no medication. All patients will be recommended to drink 2 to 3 liters of fluids per day, consume 10 grams of NaCl per day, and practice counter-pressure maneuvers. In medication arms, patients will start on 5 mg of midodrine TDS or 0.05 mg of fludrocortisone BD. After one week the dosage will be up-titrated to midodrine 30 mg/day and fludrocortisone 0.2 mg/day. Patient tolerance will be the principal guide to dosage adjustments. We will follow-up the patients on 3, 6, 9, and 12 months after randomization. The primary outcome is the time to first syncopal episode. Secondary outcomes include the recurrence rate of VVS, time interval between first and second episodes, changes in quality of life (QoL), and major and minor adverse drug reactions. QoL will be examined by the 36-Item Short Form Survey questionnaire at enrollment and 12 months after randomization. CONCLUSION: The COMFORTS trial is the first study that aims to make a head-to-head comparison between midodrine and fludrocortisone, against a background of lifestyle modifications for preventing recurrences of VVS and improving QoL in patients with VVS.
BACKGROUNDS AND AIMS: The occurrence of refractory ascites in nearly 17% of patients with decompensated cirrhosis is an unresolved issue. Advanced liver disease, functional renal impairment, and vascular insensitivity to vasopressors are the main causes of its refractoriness. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the impact on diuresis, weight loss, and short-term survival if midodrine and rifaximin were added to the diuretic therapy (DT). MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study evaluated the eligibility of 650 patients with cirrhosis and refractory ascites who were selected during the period from November 2011 to May 2015. A total of 50 patients were excluded and finally 600 were selected and divided into the following groups: patients exposed to DT (n=200) as a control group, or DT with midodrine and rifaximin group (n=400). Body weight, mean arterial pressure, and glomerular filtration rate were determined. Plasma renin and aldosterone were also determined. Follow-up was performed after 2, 6, and 12 weeks, and then every 2 months for 24 months. RESULTS: The mean arterial pressure was significantly higher in the midodrine and rifaximin group (P=0.000), and there was a highly significant weight loss after 12 weeks (12.5 kg) (P=0.000), a highly significant increase in serum sodium, urine output, and urinary sodium excretion (P=0.000), and creatinine clearance was more reduced in the control group. With rifaximin and midodrine, a complete response occurred in 310 (78%) patients, a partial response in 72 (18%), and no response in 18 (4%) versus 30 (15%), 110 (55%), and 60 (30%) in the control group, respectively (P=0.000). Midodrine and rifaximin significantly reduced paracentesis needs when compared with the controls (18 study patients vs. 75 DT-only patients, P=0.000). CONCLUSION: Adding rifaximin and midodrine to DT enhanced diuresis in refractory ascites with improved systemic, renal hemodynamics and short-term survival.
PURPOSE: ICU discharge is often delayed by a requirement for intravenous vasopressor medications to maintain normotension. We hypothesised that the administration of midodrine, an oral alpha(1)-adrenergic agonist, as adjunct to standard treatment shortens the duration of intravenous vasopressor requirement. METHODS: In this multicentre, randomised, controlled trial including three tertiary referral hospitals in the US and Australia, we enrolled adult patients with hypotension requiring a single-agent intravenous vasopressor for >/= 24 h. Subjects received oral midodrine (20 mg) or placebo every 8 h in addition to standard care until cessation of intravenous vasopressors, ICU discharge, or occurrence of adverse events. The primary outcome was time to vasopressor discontinuation. Secondary outcomes included time to ICU discharge readiness, ICU and hospital lengths of stay, and ICU readmission rates. RESULTS: Between October 2012 and June 2019, 136 participants were randomised, of whom 132 received the allocated intervention and were included in the analysis (modified intention-to-treat approach). Time to vasopressor discontinuation was not different between midodrine and placebo groups (median [IQR], 23.5 [10-54] vs 22.5 [10.4-40] h; difference, 1 h; 95% CI - 10.4 to 12.3 h; p = 0.62). No differences in secondary endpoints were observed. Bradycardia occurred more often after midodrine administration (5 [7.6%] vs 0 [0%], p = 0.02). CONCLUSION: Midodrine did not accelerate liberation from intravenous vasopressors and was not effective for the treatment of hypotension in critically ill patients.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Splanchnic arterial vasodilatation plays an important role in cirrhotic ascites. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of long term administration of midodrine on systemic hemodynamics, renal function, and control of ascites in patients with cirrhosis and refractory or recurrent ascites. METHODS: Forty cirrhotic patients with refractory or recurrent ascites were prospectively studied after long term administration of midodrine plus standard medical therapy (n=20) or standard medical therapy alone (n=20) in a randomized controlled trial at a tertiary centre. RESULTS: A significant increase in urinary volume, urinary sodium excretion, mean arterial pressure, and decrease in plasma renin activity (p<0.05) was noted after 1 month of midodrine administration. There was also a significant decrease in cardiac output and an increase in systemic vascular resistance after midodrine therapy at 3 months (p<0.05). There was no change in glomerular filtration rate and model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score. Midodrine plus standard medical therapy was significantly superior to standard medical therapy alone in the control of ascites (p=0.013) at 3 months. The mortality rate in the standard medical therapy group was significantly higher than the midodrine group (p<0.046). There was no significant difference in the frequency of various complications at the end of follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this randomized pilot study suggest that midodrine plus standard medical therapy improves the systemic hemodynamics without any renal or hepatic dysfunction in these patients and is superior to standard medical therapy alone for the control of ascites.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Large-volume paracentesis (LVP) is the treatment of choice for patients with cirrhosis and refractory ascites. However, LVP can lead to postparacentesis circulatory dysfunction (PCD), which is associated with faster ascites recurrence and renal failure. PCD results from vasodilatation, which reduces effective blood volume, and is prevented by intravenous administration of albumin. Vasoconstrictors could be used instead of albumin and, with longer use, prevent PCD and delay ascites recurrence. METHODS: We performed a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to compare albumin with the vasoconstrictor combination of octreotide and midodrine in patients with refractory ascites who underwent LVP. Patients in the albumin group received a single intravenous dose of albumin at the time of LVP plus placebos for midodrine and octreotide (n = 13). Patients in the vasoconstrictor group received saline solution (as a placebo for albumin), 10 mg of oral midodrine (3 times/day), and a monthly 20-mg intramuscular injection of long-acting octreotide (n = 12). Patients were followed up until recurrence of ascites. RESULTS: The median times to recurrence of ascites were 10 days in the albumin group and 8 days in the vasoconstrictor group (P = .318). There were no significant differences in PCD between the albumin group (18%) and the vasoconstrictor group (25%, P = .574). When ascites recurred, serum levels of creatinine were higher in the vasoconstrictor group (1.2 vs 0.9 mg/dL in the albumin group; P = .051). CONCLUSIONS: The combination of midodrine and octreotide after LVP is not superior to albumin in delaying recurrence of ascites or preventing PCD in patients with cirrhosis. Outcomes appear to be worse in patients given octreotide and midodrine. ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00108355.
