Miglustat is an orally administered ceramide glucosyltransferase inhibitor which prevents the lysosomal accumulation of glucocerebroside that occurs in patients with Gaucher's disease. In noncomparative trials in patients with type 1 Gaucher's disease, miglustat (50 or 100mg three times daily) for 6-12 months significantly reduced baseline liver and spleen volumes. At both 6 and 12 months, the reductions in organ volumes were greater with the higher dosage. Miglustat 50 or 100mg three times daily for 6-12 months had no significant effect on haemoglobin concentrations. Baseline platelet counts were not significantly improved by either dosage at 6 months, although the higher dosage significantly increased platelet counts at 12 months. In an open extension phase, patients continued to show further reductions in organ volume as well as significant improvements in haematological parameters at 24 and 36 months. black triangle In a 6-month randomised study in patients with type 1 Gaucher's disease who had previously received long-term enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), liver volume reduction was greater with miglustat plus ERT than with ERT alone. Diarrhoea and weight loss were the most frequent adverse events associated with miglustat therapy. Fine tremor has been reported in approximately 30% of miglustat-treated patients.
BACKGROUND: Pompe disease is a rare disorder characterised by progressive loss of muscle and respiratory function due to acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. Enzyme replacement therapy with recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase, alglucosidase alfa, is the first approved treatment for the disease, but some patients do not respond, and many do not show a sustained benefit. We aimed to assess the safety and efficacy of an investigational two-component therapy (cipaglucosidase alfa, a novel recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase, plus miglustat, an enzyme stabiliser) for late-onset Pompe disease. METHODS: We did a randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, phase 3 trial at 62 neuromuscular and metabolic medical centres in 24 countries in the Americas, Asia-Pacific, and Europe. Eligible participants were aged 18 years or older with late-onset Pompe disease, and had either been receiving alglucosidase alfa for at least 2 years or were enzyme replacement therapy-naive. Participants were randomly assigned (2:1) using interactive response technology software, stratified by 6-min walk distance and previous enzyme replacement therapy status, to intravenous cipaglucosidase alfa (20 mg/kg) plus oral miglustat or to intravenous alglucosidase alfa (20 mg/kg) plus oral placebo once every 2 weeks for 52 weeks. Patients, investigators, and outcome assessors were masked to treatment assignment. The primary endpoint was change from baseline to week 52 in 6-min walk distance, assessed using a mixed-effect model for repeated measures analysis for comparison of superiority in the intention-to-treat population (all patients who received at least one dose of study drug). This study is now complete and is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03729362. FINDINGS: Between Dec 3, 2018, and Nov 26, 2019, 130 patients were screened for eligibility and 125 were enrolled and randomly assigned to receive cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat (n=85) or alglucosidase alfa plus placebo (n=40). Two patients in the alglucosidase alfa plus placebo group did not receive any dose due to absence of genotype confirmation of late-onset Pompe disease and were excluded from analysis. Six patients discontinued (one in the alglucosidase alfa plus placebo group, five in the cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat group), and 117 completed the study. At week 52, mean change from baseline in 6-min walk distance was 20.8 m (SE 4.6) in the cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat group versus 7.2 m (6.6) in the alglucosidase alfa plus placebo group using last observation carried forward (between-group difference 13.6 m [95% CI -2.8 to 29.9]). 118 (96%) of 123 patients experienced at least one treatment-emergent adverse event during the study; the incidence was similar between the cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat group (n=81 [95%]) and the alglucosidase alfa plus placebo group (n=37 [97%]). The most frequently reported treatment-emergent adverse events were fall (25 [29%] patients in the cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat group vs 15 [39%] in the alglucosidase alfa plus placebo group), headache (20 [24%] vs 9 [24%]), nasopharyngitis (19 [22%] vs 3 [8%]), myalgia (14 [16%] vs 5 [13%]), and arthralgia (13 [15%]) vs 5 [13%]). 12 serious adverse events occurred in eight patients in the cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat group; only one event (anaphylaxis) was deemed related to study drug. One serious adverse event (stroke) occurred in the alglucosidase alfa plus placebo group, which was deemed unrelated to study drug. There were no deaths. INTERPRETATION: Cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat did not achieve statistical superiority to alglucosidase alfa plus placebo for improving 6-min walk distance in our overall population of patients with late-onset Pompe disease. Further studies should investigate the longer-term safety and efficacy of cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat and whether this investigational two-component therapy might provide benefits, particularly in respiratory function and in patients who have been receiving enzyme replacement therapy for more than 2 years, as suggested by our secondary and subgroup analyses. FUNDING: Amicus Therapeutics.
OBJECTIVE: Niemann-Pick disease type C (NP-C) is a rare, autosomal recessive, neurodegenerative disease associated with a wide variety of progressive neurological manifestations. Miglustat is indicated for the treatment of progressive neurological manifestations in both adults and children. Since approval in 2009 there has been a vast growth in clinical experience with miglustat. The effectiveness of miglustat has been assessed using a range of measures. METHODS: Comprehensive review of published data from studies of cellular neuropathological markers and structural neurological indices in the brain, clinical impairment/disability, specific clinical neurological manifestations, and patient survival. RESULTS: Cranial diffusion tensor imaging and magnetic resonance spectroscopy studies have shown reduced levels of choline (a neurodegeneration marker), and choline/N-acetyl aspartate ratio (indicating increased neuronal viability) in the brain during up to 5 years of miglustat therapy, as well as a slowing of reductions in fractional anisotropy (an axonal/myelin integrity marker). A 2-year immunoassay study showed significant reductions in CSF-calbindin during treatment, indicating reduced cerebellar Purkinje cell loss. Magnetic resonance imaging studies have demonstrated a protective effect of miglustat on cerebellar and subcortical structure that correlated with clinical symptom severity. Numerous cohort studies assessing core neurological manifestations (impaired ambulation, manipulation, speech, swallowing, other) using NP-C disability scales indicate neurological stabilization over 2-8 years, with a trend for greater benefits in patients with older (non-infantile) age at neurological onset. A randomized controlled trial and several cohort studies have reported improvements or stabilization of saccadic eye movements during 1-5 years of therapy. Swallowing was also shown to improve/remain stable during the randomized trial (up to 2 years), as well as in long-term observational cohorts (up to 6 years). A meta-analysis of dysphagia - a potent risk factor for aspiration pneumonia and premature death in NP-C - demonstrated a survival benefit with miglustat due to improved/stabilized swallowing function. CONCLUSIONS: The effects of miglustat on neurological NP-C manifestations has been assessed using a range of approaches, with benefits ranging from cellular changes in the brain through to visible clinical improvements and improved survival.
The phase III double-blind PROPEL study compared the novel two-component therapy cipaglucosidase alfa + miglustat (cipa + mig) with alglucosidase alfa + placebo (alg + pbo) in adults with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD). This ongoing open-label extension (OLE; NCT04138277) evaluates long-term safety and efficacy of cipa + mig. Outcomes include 6-min walk distance (6MWD), forced vital capacity (FVC), creatine kinase (CK) and hexose tetrasaccharide (Hex4) levels, patient-reported outcomes and safety. Data are reported as change from PROPEL baseline to OLE week 52 (104 weeks post-PROPEL baseline). Of 118 patients treated in the OLE, 81 continued cipa + mig treatment from PROPEL (cipa + mig group; 61 enzyme replacement therapy [ERT] experienced prior to PROPEL; 20 ERT naive) and 37 switched from alg + pbo to cipa + mig (switch group; 29 ERT experienced; 8 ERT naive). Mean (standard deviation [SD]) change in % predicted 6MWD from baseline to week 104 was + 3.1 (8.1) for cipa + mig and - 0.5 (7.8) for the ERT-experienced switch group, and + 8.6 (8.6) for cipa + mig and + 8.9 (11.7) for the ERT-naive switch group. Mean (SD) change in % predicted FVC was - 0.6 (7.5) for cipa + mig and - 3.8 (6.2) for the ERT-experienced switch group, and - 4.8 (6.5) and - 3.1 (6.7), respectively, in ERT-naive patients. CK and Hex4 levels improved in both treatment groups by week 104 with cipa + mig treatment. Three patients discontinued the OLE due to infusion-associated reactions. No new safety signals were identified. Cipa + mig treatment up to 104 weeks was associated with overall maintained improvements (6MWD, biomarkers) or stabilization (FVC) from baseline with continued durability, and was well tolerated, supporting long-term benefits for patients with LOPD.Trial registration number: NCT04138277; trial start date: December 18, 2019.
Cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat (cipa + mig) is a novel, two-component therapy for Pompe disease. We report data from the Phase I/II ATB200-02 study for up to 48 months of treatment. Four adult cohorts, including one non-ambulatory ERT-experienced (n = 6) and three ambulatory cohorts, (two enzyme replacement therapy [ERT]-experienced cohorts [2-6 years (n = 11) and >/= 7 years (n = 6)]), one ERT-naive cohort (n = 6), received 20 mg/kg intravenous-infused cipa plus 260 mg oral mig biweekly. Change from baseline (CFBL) for multiple efficacy endpoints at 12, 24, 36, and 48 months, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, safety, and immunogenicity data were assessed. Six-minute walking distance (% predicted) improved at 12, 24, 36, and 48 months: pooled ambulatory ERT-experienced cohorts, mean(+/- standard deviation [SD]) CFBL: 6.1(+/- 7.84), n = 16; 5.4(+/- 10.56), n = 13; 3.4(+/- 14.66), n = 12; 5.9(+/- 17.36), n = 9, respectively; ERT-naive cohort: 10.7(+/- 3.93), n = 6; 11.0(+/- 5.06), n = 6; 9.0(+/- 7.98), n = 5; 11.7(+/- 7.69), n = 4, respectively. Percent predicted forced vital capacity was generally stable in ERT-experienced cohorts, mean(+/- SD) CFBL - 1.2(+/- 5.95), n = 16; 1.0(+/- 7.96), n = 13; - 0.3(+/- 6.68), n = 10; 1.0(+/- 6.42), n = 6, respectively, and improved in the ERT-naive cohort: 3.2(+/- 8.42), n = 6; 4.7(+/- 5.09), n = 6; 6.2(+/- 3.35), n = 5; 8.3(+/- 4.50), n = 4, respectively. Over 48 months, CK and Hex4 biomarkers improved in ambulatory cohorts. Overall, cipa + mig was well tolerated with a safety profile like alglucosidase alfa. ATB200-02 results show the potential benefits of cipa + mig as a long-term treatment option for Pompe disease. Trial registration number: NCT02675465 January 26, 2016.
Type 1 Gaucher disease (GD) is a progressive lysosomal storage disorder due to an autosomal recessive deficiency of glucocerebrosidase. Clinical manifestations include anemia, thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, and bone and pulmonary disease. Intravenous enzyme replacement (ERT) with imiglucerase is the accepted standard for treatment of symptomatic patients. More than 3,500 patients worldwide have received ERT with well-documented beneficial effects on the hematological, visceral, skeletal, and pulmonary manifestations, and with resultant improvement in health-related quality of life. Miglustat, an imino sugar that reversibly inhibits glucosylceramide synthase and reduces intracellular substrate burden, is an oral treatment for patients with type 1 GD that was recently approved in the United States for symptomatic patients with mild to moderate clinical manifestations for whom ERT is not an option. Because responses to miglustat are slower and less robust than those observed with ERT, and because miglustat is associated with significant side effects, clinicians who care for patients with GD should become familiar with the limited indications for miglustat use and the circumstances when it may be prescribed appropriately. This review article and position statement represents the current opinion of American physicians with extensive expertise in GD regarding patient management in the context of the availability of standard imiglucerase treatment and the recent introduction of miglustat.
GM2 gangliosidosis type Sandhoff is caused by a defect of beta-hexosaminidase, an enzyme involved in the catabolism of gangliosides. It has been proposed that substrate reduction therapy using N-butyl-deoxynojirimycin (miglustat) may delay neurological progression, at least in late-onset forms of GM2 gangliosidosis. We report the results of a 3-year treatment with miglustat (100 mg t.i.d) in a patient with chronic Sandhoff disease manifesting with an atypical, spinal muscular atrophy phenotype. The follow-up included serial neurological examinations, blood tests, abdominal ultrasound, and neurophysiologic, cognitive, brain, and muscle MRI studies. We document some minor effects on neurological progression in chronic Sandhoff disease by miglustat treatment, confirming the necessity of phase II therapeutic trials including early-stage patients in order to assess its putative efficacy in chronic Sandhoff disease.
Niemann-Pick disease type C (NP-C) is a hereditary neurovisceral lipid storage disorder. Although traditionally considered a primary cholesterol storage disorder, a variety of glycolipids accumulate in NP-C cells, which resemble those from glycosphingolipidosis patients. Substrate reduction therapy (SRT) with miglustat, an inhibitor of glycosphingolipid biosynthesis, is a novel therapy for the glycosphingolipidoses. We report the use of SRT in a patient with NP-C. We show that depletion of glycosphingolipids by miglustat treatment reduces pathological lipid storage, improves endosomal uptake and normalises lipid trafficking in peripheral blood B lymphocytes. The demonstration that treatment with miglustat, which has no direct effect on cholesterol metabolism, corrects the abnormal lipid trafficking seen in B lymphocytes in NP-C indicates that glycosphingolipid accumulation is the primary pathogenetic event in NP-C. These observations support the use of SRT in patients with this devastating neurodegenerative disease.
Cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis (CLV) is a necrotizing inflammation of the small vessels in the dermis. We report the case of a Swedish man with an untreated N370S/L444P Gaucher disease who developed CLV at the age of 79 years. The patient has been treated for CLV with topical and oral corticosteroids, moisturizing agents, and periodically with antibiotics for 3 years without improvement. Administration of miglustat (N-butyldeoxynojirimycin; Zavesca(R)) because of progress of Gaucher disease resulted in a prompt and durable cure of the CLV.
BACKGROUND: Niemann-Pick disease type C (NP-C) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder with early infantile (< 2 years), late infantile (2-6 years), juvenile (7-15 years) and adolescent (> 15 years) onset. The mainstay of therapy for NP-C patients with neurological symptoms is miglustat, a drug that may modify the course of the disease. AIM: Our aim was to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of miglustat in comparison to symptomatic therapy in patients with NP-C in the socio-economic settings of the Republic of Serbia, an upper-middle-income European economy. METHOD: The perspective of the Serbian Republic Health Insurance Fund was chosen for this study, and the time horizon was eighty years. The main outcomes of the study were quality-adjusted life years gained with miglustat and comparator, and direct costs of treatment. The study was conducted through the generation and simulation of the Discrete-Event Simulation model. The model results were obtained after Monte Carlo microsimulation of a sample with 1000 virtual patients. RESULTS: Treatment with miglustat was not cost-effective when compared with symptomatic therapy and was associated with negative values of net monetary benefit regardless of the onset of neurological manifestations (- 110,447,627.00 +/- 701,614.00 RSD, - 343,871,695.00 +/- 2,577,441.00 RSD, - 1,397,908,502.00 +/- 23,084,235.00 RSD and - 2,953,680,879.00 +/- 33,297,412.00 RSD) for early infantile, late infantile, juvenile and adolescent cohorts, respectively). CONCLUSION: When traditional pharmacoeconomic evaluation is employed, miglustat is not a cost-effective option in comparison to symptomatic therapy for the treatment of NP-C. However, given the proven efficacy of miglustat, there is a need to find ways to make this drug available to all patients with NP-C.
BACKGROUND: Niemann-Pick disease type C (NP-C) is a rare neurovisceral lysosomal lipid storage disease characterized by progressive neurodegeneration and premature death. While miglustat can stabilize neurological manifestations in later onset forms of NP-C, its efficacy in the early-infantile neurological form has not been demonstrated. In this observational retrospective study, we compared long-term neurodevelopmental outcome and survival between an untreated and a treated group of early infantile NP-C patients. METHODS: Data available on all NP-C patients with early infantile neurological onset diagnosed in France between 1990 and 2013 were compiled. Patients with incomplete data or who had died from a systemic perinatal, rapidly fatal form were excluded. RESULTS: Ten patients were included in the treated group (year of birth: 2006-2012), and 16 patients in the untreated group [born 1987-2005 (n = 15), 2012 (n = 1)]. The median age at neurological onset was 9 months (5-18) in the treated group, and 12 months (3-18) in the untreated group (p = 0.22). Miglustat therapy was started at a median age of 24.5 months (9-29) and median duration was 30 months (11-56). Gastrointestinal adverse events were reported in 7/10 patients on miglustat. All patients developed loss of psychomotor acquisitions or additional neurological symptoms despite miglustat therapy. The ages of developmental milestones and neurological involvement did not significantly differ between the two groups. Four patients in the untreated group were lost to follow up. The 22 remaining patients had died by the end of the study and no patient survived beyond the age of 7.4 years. The median survival age was 4.42 years in the untreated group and 5.56 years in the treated group; the Kaplan-Meier survival curves were not significantly different (log-rank test: p = 0.11). CONCLUSIONS: Miglustat allowed no significant long-term neurodevelopmental improvement nor significant increase of survival in patients with early infantile NP-C.
Aim: Late-onset Pompe disease is characterized by progressive loss of muscular and respiratory function. Until recently, standard of care was enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with alglucosidase alfa. Second-generation ERTs avalglucosidase alfa (aval) and cipaglucosidase alfa with miglustat (cipa+mig) are now available. Without head-to-head trials comparing aval with cipa+mig, an indirect treatment comparison is informative and timely for understanding potential clinical differentiation. Materials & methods: A systematic literature review was performed to identify relevant studies on cipa+mig and aval. Using patient-level and aggregate published data from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and phase I/II and open-label extension (OLE) trials, a multi-level network meta-regression was conducted, adjusting for various baseline covariates, including previous ERT duration, to obtain relative effect estimates on 6-minute walk distance (6MWD, meters [m]) and forced vital capacity (FVC, % predicted [pp]). Analyses of two networks were conducted: Network A, including only RCTs, and network B, additionally including single-arm OLE and phase I/II studies. Results: Network B (full evidence analysis) showed that cipa+mig was associated with a relative increase in 6MWD (mean difference 28.93 m, 95% credible interval [8.26-50.11 m]; Bayesian probability 99.7%) and FVC (2.88 pp [1.07-4.71 pp]; >99.9%) compared with aval. The comparison between cipa+mig and aval became more favorable for cipa+mig with increasing previous ERT duration for both end points. Analysis of network A showed that cipa+mig was associated with a relative decrease in 6MWD (-10.02 m [-23.62 to 4.00 m]; 91.8%) and FVC (-1.45 pp [-3.01 to 0.07 pp]; 96.8%) compared with aval. Conclusion: Cipa+mig showed a favorable effect versus aval when all available evidence was used in the analysis.
Gaucher disease occurs mainly as a result of a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme beta-glucocerebrosidase activity. A rare variant form of Gaucher disease is known in which saposin C required for glucosylceramide degradation is deficient. In an earlier paper we described the first cases of two siblings with the non-neuronopathic form of Gaucher disease caused by saposin C deficiency [Tylki-Szymanska et al., 2007]. In this article, we present a follow up of clinical and biochemical findings in one patient who has been treated with miglustat for two years. We observed that administration of miglustat failed to exert any favorable effect on the clinical condition, haematological parameters and glucosylceramide level in the serum. In two individuals (described in this article) very slow deterioration of the peripheral and central nervous systems was observed.
