The National Institutes of Health (US NIH, 2018) estimates that in the US approximately 50 million men and 30 million women suffer from AGA (also known as pattern hair loss). Minoxidil is the only topical drug for the treatment of both female and male pattern hair loss. In the US, minoxidil is approved over-the-counter (OTC) at a maximum concentration of 5%. In this review, we summarize the findings of the pivotal studies used in support of the drug's approval as well as recent discoveries and novel developments in the use of minoxidil for the treatment of AGA.
Topical minoxidil (5% foam, 5% solution, and 2% solution) is FDA-approved for androgenetic alopecia (AGA) in men and women.Mechanism of action: Minoxidil acts through multiple pathways (vasodilator, anti-inflammatory agent, inducer of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, an antiandrogen), and may also affect the length of the anagen and telogen phases.Pharmacokinetics: Approximately 1.4% of topical minoxidil is absorbed through the skin. Minoxidil is a prodrug that is metabolized by follicular sulfotransferase to minoxidil sulfate (active form). Those with higher sulfotransferase activity may respond better than patients with lower sulfotransferase activity.Clinical efficacy (topical minoxidil): In a five-year study, 2% minoxidil exhibited peak hair growth in males at year one with a decline in subsequent years. Topical minoxidil causes hair regrowth in both frontotemporal and vertex areas. The 5% solution and foam were not significantly different in efficacy from the 2% solution.Oral and Sublingual minoxidil (not FDA approved; off-label): After 6 months of administration, minoxidil 5 mg/day was significantly more effective than topical 5% and 2% in male AGA. Low-dose 0.5-5 mg/day may also be safe and effective for female pattern hair loss and chronic telogen effluvium. Sublingual minoxidil may be safe and effective in male and female pattern hair loss.
BACKGROUND: Although topical minoxidil is an effective treatment option for hair loss, many patients are poorly compliant because of the necessity to apply the medication twice a day, undesirable hair texture, and scalp irritation. OBJECTIVE: In recent years, oral minoxidil at low dose has been proposed as a safe alternative. This study reviewed articles in which oral minoxidil was used to treat hair loss to determine its efficacy and safety as an alternative to topical minoxidil. METHODS: PubMed searches were performed to identify articles discussing oral minoxidil as the primary form of treatment for hair loss published up to April 2020. RESULTS: A total of 17 studies with 634 patients were found discussing the use of oral minoxidil as the primary treatment modality for hair loss. Androgenetic alopecia was the most studied condition, but other conditions included telogen effluvium, lichen planopilaris, loose anagen hair syndrome, monilethrix, alopecia areata, and permanent chemotherapy-induced alopecia. LIMITATIONS: Larger randomized studies comparing the efficacy/safety of different doses with standardized objective measurements will be needed to clarify the best treatment protocol. CONCLUSION: Oral minoxidil was found to be an effective and well-tolerated treatment alternative for healthy patients having difficulty with topical formulations.
Androgenetic alopecia is a widespread condition that is the most common type of hair loss affecting approximately 58% and 40% of men and women by the age of 50, respectively. Patients have been known to experience severe distress due to androgenetic alopecia, including anxiety, low self-esteem, and depression. The objective of this study was to conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis to determine the efficacy of combination therapy using topical minoxidil and microneedling compared to topical minoxidil alone. This systematic review of randomized controlled trials was carried out using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist. The literature search was performed using Scopus, Cochrane, Embase, and the National Institutes of Health's United States National Library of Medicine from inception through January 20, 2023. Randomized controlled trials examining the efficacy of combinational therapy and monotherapy using microneedling and minoxidil on patients with clinically diagnosed androgenetic alopecia were included after screening titles, abstracts, and full texts. Two independent reviewers selected studies, extracted data, and appraised the risk of bias using the Cochrane risk of bias assessment tool. Ten randomized controlled trials, including 466 patients, were selected for this review and eight studies were ultimately included in the meta-analysis. All eight studies displayed a statistically significant increase in total hair count [standard mean difference (SMD) 1.76; 95% CI 1.26-2.26; P < 0.00001]; however, the evidence did not support a statistically significant increase in hair diameter (SMD 0.82; 95% CI - 0.01 to 1.65; P = 0.05). No scarring nor serious adverse events were reported in any of the studies. The findings of this meta-analysis strongly support the utilization of a multimodal therapeutic approach of minoxidil and microneedling for hair growth in patients with androgenetic alopecia. However, variations in factors such as rating scale measurements, microneedling methods, and areas of treatment may have resulted in confounding. Further randomized controlled, large-sample trials employing rigorous methodologies are needed to gain a more comprehensive understanding regarding treatment efficacy, namely the impact of combinational therapy on hair diameter.Clinical trial registrations This study follows the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and is registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) database (CRD42023391164) and the International Platform of Registered Systematic Review and Meta-analysis Protocols (INPLASY) database (INPLASY202310031).
INTRODUCTION: Androgenetic alopecia is a stressful condition for males. Minoxidil 2% and 5% have been FDA approved for treatment of this condition. In literature, all studies have compared minoxidil 5% with 2%. Although other concentrations (2% to 12.5%) are available nowadays, we believe our study is the first to compare 10% versus 5% topical minoxidil in treatment of AGA. OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of 5% topical minoxidil with 10% topical minoxidil and placebo in AGA treatment. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 36-weeks, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, randomized trial. A total of 90 men with AGA. First group have applied 5% minoxidil solution, second group applied 10% minoxidil solution; or third placebo group. Efficacy was evaluated clinically and trichoscopically. RESULTS: After 36 weeks of therapy; 5% topical minoxidil (0.47 +/- 0.26) (0.59 +/- 0.64) was significantly superior to 10% topical minoxidil (0.05 +/- 0.13) (0.45 +/- 0.74) and placebo (0.01 +/- 0.05) (-0.03 +/- 0.08) in terms of change from baseline in total vertex and frontal hair mean count respectively. Pull test change to negative in minoxidil 5%: (37%) patients after 6 month treatment, Minoxidil 10% group (37.5%) patients changed and in placebo group all patients after 6 month were the same (0%) change. No reported sexual dysfunction in all three groups. CONCLUSION: Five percent of topical minoxidil was moderately superior to 10% topical minoxidil and placebo in increasing hair regrowth opposite to the expected, the irritation was marked for 10% topical minoxidil. Psychosocial stress after 10% usage were worsen by the shedding, irritation compared to their high expectation in comparison to 5% usage.
BACKGROUND: Topical minoxidil solution 2% stimulates new hair growth and helps stop the loss of hair in individuals with androgenetic alopecia (AGA). Results can be variable, and historical experience suggests that higher concentrations of topical minoxidil may enhance efficacy. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this 48-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, multicenter trial was to compare 5% topical minoxidil with 2% topical minoxidil and placebo in the treatment of men with AGA. METHODS: A total of 393 men (18-49 years old) with AGA applied 5% topical minoxidil solution (n = 157), 2% topical minoxidil solution (n = 158), or placebo (vehicle for 5% solution; n = 78) twice daily. Efficacy was evaluated by scalp target area hair counts and patient and investigator assessments of change in scalp coverage and benefit of treatment. RESULTS: After 48 weeks of therapy, 5% topical minoxidil was significantly superior to 2% topical minoxidil and placebo in terms of change from baseline in nonvellus hair count, patient rating of scalp coverage and treatment benefit, and investigator rating of scalp coverage. Hair count data indicate that response to treatment occurred earlier with 5% compared with 2% topical minoxidil. Additionally, data from a patient questionnaire on quality of life, global benefit, hair growth, and hair styling demonstrated that 5% topical minoxidil helped improve patients' psychosocial perceptions of hair loss. An increased occurrence of pruritus and local irritation was observed with 5% topical minoxidil compared with 2% topical minoxidil. CONCLUSION: In men with AGA, 5% topical minoxidil was clearly superior to 2% topical minoxidil and placebo in increasing hair regrowth, and the magnitude of its effect was marked (45% more hair regrowth than 2% topical minoxidil at week 48). Men who used 5% topical minoxidil also had an earlier response to treatment than those who used 2% topical minoxidil. Psychosocial perceptions of hair loss in men with AGA were also improved. Topical minoxidil (5% and 2%) was well tolerated by the men in this trial without evidence of systemic effects.
IMPORTANCE: There has been increased interest in low-dose oral minoxidil for androgenetic alopecia (AGA) treatment. However, the efficacy of oral minoxidil for male AGA is yet to be evaluated in comparative therapeutic trials. OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of daily oral minoxidil, 5 mg, vs twice-daily topical minoxidil, 5%, for 24 weeks in the treatment of male AGA. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial was conducted at a single specialized clinic in Brazil. Eligible men with AGA aged 18 to 55 years classified using the Norwood-Hamilton scale as 3V, 4V, or 5V were included and randomized. Data were collected from January to December 2021, and data were analyzed from September 2022 to February 2023. INTERVENTIONS: Participants were randomized 1:1 into 2 groups: oral minoxidil, 5 mg, daily and topical placebo solution; or 1 mL of topical minoxidil, 5%, twice daily and oral placebo for 24 weeks. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was change in terminal hair density on the frontal and vertex regions of the scalp. The secondary outcomes were change in total hair density and photographic evaluation. RESULTS: Among 90 enrolled participants, 68 completed the study; of these, the mean (SD) age was 36.6 (7.8) years. A total of 33 participants were enrolled in the oral minoxidil group and 35 in the topical treatment group. Both groups were homogenous in terms of demographic data and AGA severity. For the frontal area, the mean change from baseline to week 24 between groups was 3.1 hairs per cm2 (95% CI, -18.2 to 21.5; P = .27) for terminal hair density and 2.6 hairs per cm2 (95% CI, -10.3 to 15.8; P = .32) for total hair density. For the vertex area, the mean change from baseline to week 24 was 23.4 hairs per cm2 (95% CI, -0.3 to 43.0; P = .09) for terminal density and 5.5 hairs per cm2 (95% CI, -12.5 to 23.5; P = .32) for total hair density. According to the photographic analysis, oral minoxidil was superior to topical minoxidil on the vertex (24%; 95% CI, 0 to 48; P = .04) but not on the frontal scalp (12%; 95% CI, -12 to 36; P = .24). The most common adverse effects in the oral minoxidil group were hypertrichosis (22 of 45 [49%]) and headache (6 of 45 [14%]). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this study, oral minoxidil, 5 mg, once per day for 24 weeks did not demonstrate superiority over topical minoxidil, 5%, twice per day in men with AGA. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Brazilian Registry of Clinical Trials Identifier: RBR-252w9r.
Minoxidil is an orally active vasodilator for treatment of severe hypertension. In combination with diuretics and beta-adrenergic blocking agents, it is effective treatment for more than 80% of patients whose blood pressure has been inadequately controlled with combinations of other been inadequately controlled with combinations of other antihypertensive drugs. Major adverse reactions include reflex activation of the adrenergic nervous system, renal sodium retention, and hypertrichosis. Despite the possibility of adverse reactions, minoxidil is indicated in patients whose blood pressure cannot be controlled with conventional therapy, in persons with major adverse reactions to other drugs, and in patients who are candidates for bilateral nephrectomy for control of hypertension.
Low dose oral minoxidil (LDOM) is an efficacious and safe treatment for alopecia, however, a notable side effect is hypertrichosis. Spironolactone, known for treating hirsutism, is also used off-label for the treatment of certain forms of alopecia and may reduce LDOM-induced hypertrichosis. We performed a retrospective review of 54 patients seen at NYU Langone Health and compared hypertrichosis rates in female alopecia patients on LDOM monotherapy versus those on combination therapy with spironolactone. Among 54 patients, 37 received LDOM alone and 17 received the combination. Hypertrichosis developed in 33.3% of patients, with lower rates in the combination group (17.6% vs. 40.5% for monotherapy). Although not statistically significant, the trend suggests spironolactone may mitigate hypertrichosis. The study highlights the potential of combination therapy to address hypertrichosis and calls for larger studies to confirm these findings.
BACKGROUND: Minoxidil is a widely used over-the-counter topical treatment for hair loss. The response rate for topical minoxidil is relatively low. Minoxidil is a pro-drug, converted to its active form, minoxidil sulfate, by SULT1A1 enzymes located in the scalp. Recently, a novel topical formula that increases the activity of SULT1A1 in hair follicles was reported. AIMS: To evaluate any benefit of applying the SULT1A1 enzyme booster prior to daily 5% minoxidil treatment. METHODS: Male androgenic alopecia patients were recruited to a randomized blinded placebo-controlled study. Patients were randomized to receive 5% topical minoxidil plus the novel formula or minoxidil plus a sham adjuvant. Patient's hair growth was monitored using global photography over 60 days. RESULTS: Twenty-four males with androgenic alopecia (Norwood scale average 4.4, range 2-6) were randomized and completed the trial: 12 in the active arm and 12 in placebo. 75% of the subjects who used the SULT1A1 adjuvant with their daily minoxidil treatments for 60 days regrew hair versus 33% of those using the placebo adjuvant (p = 0.023). CONCLUSIONS: In a small cohort of androgenetic alopecia men, adding the SULT1A1 adjuvant to their daily minoxidil treatment regimen improved hair regrowth.
BACKGROUND: A once-daily minoxidil topical foam (MTF) has been developed to treat female pattern hair loss.<br/> OBJECTIVE: Determine noninferiority of once-daily 5% MTF versus twice-daily 2% minoxidil topical solution (MTS) based on the change from baseline in target area hair count (TAHC) at 24 weeks. METHODS: In a randomized, phase III trial, women with female pattern hair loss received once-daily 5% MTF (n=161) or twice-daily 2% MTS (n=161) for 52 weeks. Primary endpoint was change from baseline in TAHC at 24 weeks. Secondary endpoint was change from baseline in TAHC at 12 weeks. Exploratory endpoints included change in total unit area density and change in overall scalp coverage.<br/> RESULTS: Once-daily 5% MTF increased TAHC from baseline (adjusted mean +/- standard error) by 23.9 +/- 2.1 hairs/cm(2) at week 24. Twice-daily 2% MTS increased TAHC 24.2 +/- 2.1 hairs/cm(2) at week 24. The treatment difference was -0.3 hairs/cm(2) (95% CI = -6.0, 5.4). Since the lower bound of the 95% CI was less than -5.0, the prespecified noninferiority goal was not met. Both treatments were well tolerated.<br/> CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily 5% MTF and twice-daily 2% MTS induced hair regrowth in female pattern hair loss, but prespecified noninferiority criteria were not met.<br /> ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01145625 <br /><br /> <em>J Drugs Dermatol.</em> 2016;15(7):883-889.
Minoxidil is a Health Canada and US FDA-approved medication for hair loss in men and women. While 5% minoxidil foam has been approved for men since 2006, Health Canada and the FDA only approved 5% minoxidil foam for female pattern hair loss (FPHL) in 2014. Recent Phase III clinical trials demonstrated the efficacy of once daily 5% minoxidil foam for treatment of FPHL, where a significant change from baseline in the target area hair count was observed compared to placebo. Similar changes in hair count for 5% foam and twice daily 2% minoxidil solution established noninferiority of the 5% foam formulation. Five percent minoxidil foam provides an additional option for women with FPHL and will soon be available in Canada.
IMPORTANCE: There are knowledge gaps regarding the relative efficacy of 3 commonly used drugs for androgenetic alopecia (AGA), namely, minoxidil and the two 5-alpha reductase inhibitors dutasteride and finasteride. OBJECTIVE: To examine the relative efficacy of any dose and administration route of minoxidil, dutasteride, and finasteride for the treatment of male AGA. DATA SOURCES: Systematic searches were performed in PubMed on March 5, 2021, without date restrictions. STUDY SELECTION: Eligible studies included those that investigated monotherapy with any dose and administration route of minoxidil, dutasteride, and finasteride. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Data on the mean (SD) difference and sample size were used for the bayesian network meta-analyses. League tables and surface under the cumulative ranking curve values were used to examine the relative efficacy of the interventions. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Study end points were change in total and terminal hair count after 24 and 48 weeks of therapy. The 4 end points were quantified in hairs per square centimeters. RESULTS: The PubMed search yielded 848 records; after the 2 stages of screening, 23 studies were eligible for quantitative analyses. Mean (SD) age of patients ranged from 22.8 (3.3) years to 41.8 (12.3) years. The greatest increase in total hair count at 24 weeks (ie, first end point) was with 0.5 mg/d of dutasteride, which was significantly more efficacious than 1 mg/d of finasteride (mean difference, 7.1 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 5.1-9.3 hairs/cm2) and minoxidil (0.25 mg/d [mean difference, 23.7 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 9.5-38.0 hairs/cm2], 5 mg/d [mean difference, 15.0 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 3.9-26.1 hairs/cm2], and 2% solution [mean difference, 8.5 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 4.8-12.3 hairs/cm2]). The greatest increase in terminal hair count at 24 weeks (ie, second end point) was with 5 mg/d of minoxidil, which was significantly more efficacious than the 0.25-mg/d dose (mean difference, 43.6 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 29.7-57.7 hairs/cm2) and its topical forms (in 2% [mean difference, 29.3 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 21.1-37.5 hairs/cm2] and 5% [mean difference, 29.8 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 19.7-39.8 hairs/cm2]); 5 mg/d of minoxidil was significantly more efficacious than 1 mg/d of finasteride (mean difference, 10.4 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 2.2-18.6 hairs/cm2). The greatest increase in total hair count at 48 weeks (ie, third end point) was with 5 mg/d of finasteride, which was significantly more efficacious than 2% topical minoxidil (mean difference, 20.7 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 9.5-31.9 hairs/cm2). The greatest increase in terminal hair count at 48 weeks (ie, fourth end point) was with 1 mg/d of finasteride, which was significantly more effective than topical minoxidil (in 2% [mean difference, 32.1 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 23.9-40.3 hairs/cm2] and 5% [mean difference, 26.2 hairs/cm2; 95% CI, 16.2-36.2 hairs/cm2]). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: As efficacy data from head-to-head trials accumulate, there could be a better sense of the relative efficacy of the different doses of the 5-alpha reductase inhibitors and minoxidil. The findings of this meta-analysis contribute to the comparative effectiveness literature for AGA therapies with regard to the compared interventions.
BACKGROUND: Alopecia areata (AA) is a chronic inflammatory disease that affects the hair follicles and sometimes the nails. It usually presents as a single or multiple patches of hair loss on the scalp, but any hair-bearing skin can be involved. AA treatment depends on the severity and extent of the disease. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy of combined fractional CO(2) (FCO(2)) laser with topical minoxidil 5% solution versus topical minoxidil 5% solution alone in the treatment of AA. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study included 150 patients with AA. The patients were collected from outpatient clinics of the Dermatology and Venerology Department, Tanta University Hospitals. Patients were divided into three groups; 60 patients were treated with topical minoxidil 5% solution, 60 patients were treated with FCO(2) laser combined with topical minoxidil 5% solution, and the third group of 30 patients represented the control group treated with topical saline. RESULTS: Compared to the placebo group, there was a statistically significant improvement in hair growth in the combination group and minoxidil group. In the combination group, 80% of patients showed excellent improvement, 13.3% of patients showed very good improvement, and 6.7% of patients showed good improvement. In the minoxidil group, 53% of patients showed excellent improvement, 40% of patients showed very good improvement, and 6.7% of patients showed good improvement after 3 months of therapy. Side effects were minimal and transient in both groups. CONCLUSION: Topical minoxidil 5% solution either alone or in combination with FCO(2) laser could be considered a safe and tolerable method for AA treatment.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanism of minoxidil in treating androgenetic alopecia (AGA). METHODS: The mechanism of action of minoxidil on AGA was first systematically investigated from the viewpoint of network pharmacology, including minoxidil-AGA target prediction, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis, molecular docking and enrichment analysis of targets related to minoxidil and AGA, and dermal papilla cell assays to confirm the viability of prediction. RESULTS: The combined analysis revealed that minoxidil treatment of AGA not only acts on androgenic receptors (AR) but also on 2 new targets, steroid 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase (CYP17A1) and aromatase (CYP19A1). The biological processes linked to these targets were concentrated on several pathways, including enzymes and hormones. Further experiments have revealed that minoxidil suppresses the expression of AR and CYP17A1, boosts the activity of CYP19A1, decreases the formation and binding of dihydrotestosterone, and enhances the production of estradiol. Through these changes, minoxidil acts as a treatment for AGA. CONCLUSION: Minoxidil may act by altering hormonal and enzymatic pathways. Our study finds two new targets (CYP17A1, CYP19A1) of minoxidil and demonstrates that minoxidil inhibits AR. These targets may provide new ideas for drug research.
