Isolated from Streptomyces caespitosus, mitomycin C (MMC) has various applications in the management of corneal and external disease due to its ability to modulate cellular proliferation. It has been employed in pterygium surgery, ocular surface neoplasia, and refractive surgery. Currently, there is no definite consensus on the treatment protocols for each of the aforementioned applications. Although its benefits in the management of corneal and external diseases are promising, MMC use has potential complications including endothelial cell loss, corneal perforation, scleral melt, secondary glaucoma, iritis, and endophthalmitis. This article will review the literature regarding the use of MMC in the field of cornea and external disease and describe protocols employed with corresponding outcomes.
Mitomycin C (MMC) is an antineoplastic antibiotic that has been used off-label in the treatment of hypertrophic scars and keloids. Herein we report our successful use of this agent in a patient with sternal keloids refractory to other means of therapy. We further review the literature regarding the use of MMC in the treatment of keloids.
PURPOSE: To investigate the effects of mitomycin-C (MMC) and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) on the viability, proliferation, and migratory capacity of cultured ocular adnexal sebaceous carcinoma (SC) cells. DESIGN: Laboratory investigation. METHODS: Human SC cell lines (Bascom Palmer 50 and 52 [BP50 and BP52]) and human limbal stem cells (LSCs) were treated with various concentrations of MMC and 5-FU. Cytotoxicity was assessed with the tetrazolium MTT colorimetric viability assay on normal corneal vs tumor cells. Growth curves and scratch assays were performed to characterize the effects of these chemotherapeutic agents on SC proliferation and migration, respectively. RESULTS: MMC decreased BP52 cell viability in a dose-dependent manner with a half-maximal effective dose (EC(50)) of 11.8 muM after 72 hours. SC viability decreased >50% at 80 mM 5-FU after 72 hours. MMC reduced LSC viability in a dose-dependent manner with an EC(50) value of 3.24 muM, and 5-FU decreased LSC viability >50% at 160 muM. MMC decreased SC cell proliferation and migration in a dose-dependent manner. 5-FU displayed antiproliferative effects but did not affect cell migration at concentrations below 1000 muM. CONCLUSIONS: Our in vitro data corroborate clinical observations that MMC is efficacious for treating ocular adnexal SC, albeit at the expense of LSC viability. Our findings also demonstrate that topical 5-FU exhibits antiproliferative effects that supersede its cancer-killing and antimigratory effects on cultured SC cells.
Mitomycin C (MMC) intravesical therapy for "superficial" papillary bladder tumors was firstly introduced in the early seventies with promising results. In the following years, several pharmacokinetic studies investigated its mechanism of action to optimize the intravesical administration. Numerous studies confirmed thereafter both the ablative and the prophylactic efficacy and the low toxicity of MMC when intravesically given. In 1984, a complete response rate of 42% in 60 patients not responsive to thiotepa was reported with intravesical MMC at the dose of 40 mg diluted in 40 ml for 8 weeks. In the following decades, many large randomized studies showed the benefit of intravesical prophylaxis with MMC versus transurethral resection (TUR) alone. Since 2002, the role of adjuvant intravesical chemotherapy and of an early MMC instillation in preventing recurrence compared with TUR alone has been confirmed by large meta-analyses and stated by the European Association of Urology (EAU) guidelines. The need for further intravesical chemotherapy after the early instillation in patients at intermediate-high risk of recurrence has been proved by several trials. Although intravesical Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) is considered the best choice for high-risk patients and MMC for the low-risk group, both MMC and BCG can be given to prevent recurrence in intermediate-risk patients. However, the higher efficacy of BCG over MMC is evident only if maintenance regimen is administered. Despite its proven efficacy, immediate intravesical MMC is not yet fully entered in common clinical practice and efforts should be made by the urologists to optimize its adoption.
The results of primary trabeculectomy with and without mitomycin C (MMC) were evaluated in young glaucoma patients. The patients, 15-40 years of age, were divided into two main groups and two subgroups. In group IA, primary Cairns type trabeculectomy was performed in 24 eyes of 24 patients with juvenile glaucoma; in group IB, trabeculectomy + MMC 0.4 mg/ml in 3 min was done in 20 eyes of 20 patients with juvenile glaucoma; in group IIA, primary trabeculectomy was performed in 20 eyes of 20 patients with developmental glaucoma, and in group IIB, trabeculectomy + MMC 0.4 mg/ml in 3 min was performed in 16 eyes of 16 patients with developmental glaucoma. The success rate of the surgery was 75% in group IA, 90% in group IB, 50% in group IIA, and 75% in group IIB. There was no statistically significant difference among the groups in terms of success rates of trabeculectomies (p > 0.05).
The berberine bridge enzyme (BBE)-like flavoproteins have attracted continuous attention for their capability to catalyze various oxidative reactions. Here we demonstrate that MitR, a secreted BBE-like enzyme, functions as a special drug-binding efflux protein evolved from quinone reductase. Moreover, this protein provides self-resistance to its hosts toward the DNA-alkylating agent mitomycin C with a distinctive strategy, featured by independently performing drug binding and efflux.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Mitomycin C (MMC) is an alkylating agent with extraordinary ability to crosslink DNA, preventing DNA synthesis. By this virtue, MMC is an important antitumor drug. In addition, MMC has become the gold standard medication for glaucoma filtration surgery (GFS). This eye surgery creates a passage for drainage of aqueous humor (AqH) out of the eye into the sub-Tenon's space with the aim of lowering the intraocular pressure. A major cause of failure of this operation is fibrosis and scarring in the sub-Tenon's space, which will restrict AqH outflow. Intraoperative application of MMC during GFS has increased GFS success rate, presumably mainly by reducing fibrosis after GFS. However, still 10% of glaucoma surgeries fail within the first year. RECENT FINDINGS: In this review, we evaluate risks and benefits of MMC as an adjuvant for GFS. In addition, we discuss possible improvements of its use by adjusting dose and method of administration. SUMMARY: One way of improving GFS outcome is to prolong MMC delivery by using a drug delivery system.
PURPOSE: Ionizing radiation (IR)-induced transcriptional changes are considered a potential biodosimetry for dose evaluation and health risk monitoring of acute or chronic radiation exposure. It is crucial to understand the impact of confounding factors on the radiation-responsive gene expressions for accurate and reproducible dose assessment. This study aims to explore the potential influence of exposures to chemotherapeutic agents such as cyclophosphamide (CP) and mitomycin C (MMC) on IR-induced transcriptional biomarkers. METHODS: The human B lymphoblastoid cells (AHH-1) were exposed to 0, 20, 50, 100, 200 and 500 mug/ml CP or 0, 0.025, 0.05, 0.1 and 1 mug/ml MMC, respectively. The appropriate concentrations of CP and MMC were added for 1 h before irradiation with 0, 2, 4 and 6 Gy of (60)Co gamma-rays at a dose rate of 1 Gy/min. Cell viability was evaluated by CCK-8 assay. The gene expression responses of 18 radiation-induced transcriptional biomarkers were examined at 24 h after exposures to CP and MMC, respectively. The expression levels of five crucial DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) repair genes were also evaluated. The biodosimetry models were established based on the specific radiation-responsive gene combinations. RESULTS: The baseline transcriptional levels of the 18 selected genes were slightly affected by CP treatment in the absence of IR, while the transcript responses to IR could be inhibited as the concentration of CP up to 50 mug/ml. MMC treatment up-regulated the background levels in most radiation-responsive gene expressions. Of 18 genes, only the relative mRNA expression levels of CDKN1A and BBC3 were repressed after treatment with IR and MMC in combination. The relative mRNA level of RAD51 was significantly up-regulated after exposure to CP, while the expression of FANCD2, RAD51 and BLM showed an overall increase in response to MMC treatment. After irradiation, the relative mRNA expression levels of FANCD2, BRCA2 and RAD51 exhibited dose-dependent increases in IR alone and MMC treatment groups. In addition, the biodosimetry models were established using 2-4 radiation-responsive genes based on different radiation exposure scenarios. CONCLUSION: Our findings suggested that IR-induced gene expression changes were slightly affected after exposure to a relatively low concentration of CP and MMC. Gene expression combinations might improve the broad applicability of transcriptional biodosimetry across diverse radiation exposures.
INTRODUCTION: Esophageal strictures refractory to conservative treatment represent a major problem in children. The application of Mitomycin C to the site of stricture has been introduced, but the experience with this novel approach remains very limited. METHODS: Systematic review of publications on the topical application of Mitomycin C in children with persistent esophageal stricture. RESULTS: We identified 11 publications including 31 cases. The underlying cause of stricture was caustic ingestion in 19 (61.2%), esophageal surgery in 7 (22.6%), and others in 5 children (16.2%). The median age of the patients was 48 months (range 4 to 276 months). In the majority of cases cotton pledgets soaked in solution of Mitomycin C were applied endoscopically. Various other techniques such as drug-eluting stents were used. Mitomycin C was applied from 1 to 12 times within intervals from 1 to 12 weeks. The concentrations of Mitomycin C varied considerably between 0.1 and 1 mg/mL. After a mean follow-up time of 22 (6 to 60) months complete relief of symptoms was reported for 21 children (67.7%), and 6 (19.4%) had a partial relief. In four children (12.9%) Mitomycin C treatment failed. No direct or indirect adverse effects were reported. CONCLUSION: The short-term results of topical Mitomycin C application for refractory esophageal stricture reported in the literature are very encouraging. Prospective studies are mandatory to determine the optimal time points, dosage, and modalities of treatment before a recommendation can be given.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to investigate the physicochemical stability of mitomycin-containing medicinal products for bladder instillation, formulated with urea as excipient (mito-medac(R), Mitomycin medac). For comparison, the stability of reconstituted Urocin(R) and Mitem(R) bladder instillation was studied. METHODS: Mitomycin-containing medicinal products were either reconstituted with the prepackaged 0.9% NaCl solution, nominal volume 20 mL (mito-medac(R), Mitem(R), Urocin(R)) or with 20 mL water for injection (Mitomycin medac, Mitem(R), Urocin(R)) to a nominal concentration of 1 mg/mL and stored at room temperature (20-25 degrees C). Samples were taken immediately after reconstitution and after 24 hours. Physicochemical stability was determined by reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography with photodiode array detection, measurement of pH and osmolarity, and inspection for visible particles or colour changes. RESULTS: The initial pH values of the test solutions reconstituted with prepackaged 0.9% NaCl (5.2-5.6) were significantly lower than those reconstituted with water for injection (6.6-7.4). Solutions reconstituted with 0.9% NaCl solutions rapidly degraded and concentrations fell below the 90% limit after 24 hours of storage. When reconstituted with water for injection, degradation was less rapid. Concentrations of Mitomycin medac and Urocin remained above the 90% limit after 24 hours. CONCLUSIONS: The physicochemical stability of mitomycin 1 mg/mL bladder instillation prepared with prepackaged 0.9% NaCl in prefilled PVC bags is less than 24 hours at room temperature. Unfavourable pH values of the solvents cause rapid degradation of mitomycin. Mitomycin solutions reconstituted at the point of care should be administered immediately to avoid degradation and loss of efficacy. Urea added as excipient did not accelerate degradation.
Mitomycin C (MC), a commonly used anticancer drug, induces DNA damage via DNA alkylation. Decarbamoyl mitomycin C (DMC), another mitomycin lacking the carbamate at C10, generates similar lesions as MC. Interstrand cross-links (ICLs) are believed to be the lesions primarily responsible for the cytotoxicity of MC and DMC. The major ICL generated by MC (alpha-ICL) has a trans stereochemistry at the guanine-drug linkage whereas the major ICL from DMC (beta-ICL) has the opposite, cis, stereochemistry. In addition, DMC can provoke strong p53-independent cell death. Our hypothesis is that the stereochemistry of the major unique beta-ICL generated by DMC is responsible for this p53-independent cell death signaling. p53 gene is inactively mutated in more than half of human cancers. p21WAF1/CIP1 known as a major effector of p53 is involved in p53-dependent and -independent control of cell proliferation and death. This study revealed the role of p21WAF1/CIP1 on MC and DMC triggered cell damage. MCF-7 (p53-proficient) and K562 (p53-deficient) cells were used. Cell cycle distributions were shifted to the G1/S phase in MCF-7 treated with MC and DMC, but were shifted to the S phase in K562. p21WAF1/CIP1 activation was observed in both cells treated with MC and DMC, and DMC triggered more significant activation. Knocking down p53 in MCF-7 did not attenuate MC and DMC induced p21WAF1/CIP1 activation. The alpha-ICL itself was enough to cause p21WAF1/CIP1 activation.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to assess the intraoperative application of mitomycin C (MMC) compared to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) on the outcome of trabeculectomy and to examine the balance of risk and benefit. METHODS: Pertinent studies were selected through systematic searches of major literature databases, including the Cochrane Library, PubMed, Embase, and Chinese Biomedicine Database. Internet searches of search engines, the professional associations' websites, and the manufacturers' databases were also performed. Clinical controlled trials comparing 5-FU with MMC in trabeculectomy were selected. The primary efficacy measure was the weighted mean difference (WMD) in percentage intraocular pressure reduction (IOPR%) at follow-up end point. The secondary efficacy measure was the relative risk (RR) for "qualified" (with or without medical therapy) success of trabeculectomy at follow-up end point. The third efficacy measure was RR for "complete" (without medical therapy) success of trabeculectomy at follow-up end point. The fourth efficacy measure was RR for adverse events, including wound leak, hypotony, endophalmitis, and shallow anterior chamber (AC). The pooled effects were calculated using the random effects model by RevMan version 5.0 software. RESULTS: Eight studies enrolling a total of 536 patients were included in the meta-analysis. MMC was associated with significantly more IOPR% compared with 5-FU, with a WMD of 7.09 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.47-12.70] at follow-up end point (P=0.01). MMC was comparable with 5-FU in qualified success rate, with a RR of 1.09 (0.99-1.20) at follow-up end point (P=0.09). MMC was comparable with 5-FU in complete success rate, with a RR of 1.17 (0.79- 1.75) at follow-up end point (P=0.43). Rates of adverse events did not differ significantly between 5-FU and MMC, with an RR of 0.71 (0.22-2.28) for bleb leakage, 1.40 (0.72-2.72) for hypotony, 1.63 (0.27-9.75) for endophthalmitis, and 0.95 (0.41-2.21) for shallow AC. CONCLUSIONS: Intraoperative MMC is more effective in lowering IOP in trabeculectomy compared with intraoperative 5-FU, but is comparable with intraoperative 5-FU in both qualified and complete success rate. Intraoperative use of both agents may contribute equally to adverse events.
OBJECTIVES: To describe the management and outcomes of seven infants with subglottic cysts. To assess the role of Mitomycin-C in the management of subglottic cysts. To discuss the relationship of subglottic cysts with gastro-esophageal reflux. To extensively review the literature on subglottic cysts. DESIGN: Retrospective case series and literature review. METHODS: Case series of seven children with subglottic cysts at a tertiary care hospital. Charts were reviewed to determine birth history, gender, intubation history, comorbidities, age at presentation, presenting symptoms, interventions and follow-up. RESULTS: Between 2001 and 2009, seven patients aged 4-13 months were diagnosed with and treated for subglottic cysts. All children had a history of intubation and had evidence of gastro-esophageal reflux. All children were treated with endoscopic marsupialization (CO(2)-laser, cupped forceps) or bronchoscopic rupture; with or without concomitant topical Mitomycin-C therapy. Infants were followed clinically and with interval endoscopy with a minimum follow-up of 6 weeks. No patients receiving topical post-marsupialization Mitomycin-C (0/4) had cyst recurrence. Those patients who did not receive Mitomycin-C therapy recurred more frequently (66% - 2/3). Cysts ruptured with the bronchoscope tip recurred (66% - 2/3) more often than cysts undergoing endoscopic marsupialization (0/6). The one bronchoscopic rupture case that did not recur was the one in which Mitomycin-C was used concomitantly. Patient follow-up was at 2, 4 and 6 weeks post-procedure. CONCLUSION: Endoscopic marsupialization is the treatment of choice for subglottic cysts. Gastro-esophageal reflux has a strong association with subglottic cysts. The post-marsupialization application of Mitomycin-C may have a role in reducing the recurrence rate and scarring after surgical treatment of subglottic cysts.
PURPOSE: The purpose of the study was to investigate the incidence for endophthalmitis and blebitis after deep sclerectomy (DS) and trabeculectomy with routine use of Mitomycin C (MMC) 0.4 mg/ml. METHODS: Electronic medical records of patients who underwent surgery 1/2008-4/2020 were reviewed. Cumulative incidence for bleb-associated infection (BAI), including both endophthalmitis and blebitis, was calculated with cumulative incidence function (CIF) and Kaplan-Meier analysis. Risk factors for BAI were evaluated with univariate competing risk regression analysis and Log-rank analysis. Competing event in CIF was death. RESULTS: In this retrospective single-centre cohort study, a total of 2653 patients and 3411 eyes underwent surgery: 3478 glaucoma surgeries, 2419 DS and 1059 trabeculectomies. Two cases of endophthalmitis and three of isolated blebitis developed. Median follow-up from the most recent surgery on the eye until the end of the study was 5.5 years, and until last visit at the ophthalmology department was 1.9 years. For the whole follow-up period in CIF-analysis, cumulative incidence for BAI was 0.16% (95% CI 0.06-0.36) at five years. Incidence was higher with eyes not treated with an antifibrotic during surgery (sub-hazard ratio 11.66, 95% CI 1.94-70.21, p = 0.007). Cumulative incidence between surgery and last visit with Kaplan-Meier analysis was 0.21% (95% CI 0.08-0.52) at five years, similarly, not using an antifibrotic increased incidence (Log-rank p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: Cumulative incidence for BAI was low despite routine use of high-dose MMC.
