BACKGROUND: Methylphenidate, modafinil, and amantadine are commonly prescribed medications for alleviating fatigue in multiple sclerosis; however, the evidence supporting their efficacy is sparse and conflicting. Our goal was to compare the efficacy of these three medications with each other and placebo in patients with multiple sclerosis fatigue. METHODS: In this randomised, placebo-controlled, four-sequence, four-period, crossover, double-blind trial, patients with multiple sclerosis who reported fatigue and had a Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS) score of more than 33 were recruited at two academic multiple sclerosis centres in the USA. Participants received oral amantadine (up to 100 mg twice daily), modafinil (up to 100 mg twice daily), methylphenidate (up to 10 mg twice daily), or placebo, each given for up to 6 weeks. All patients were intended to receive all four study medications, in turn, in one of four different sequences with 2-week washout periods between medications. A biostatistician prepared a concealed allocation schedule, stratified by site, randomly assigning a sequence of medications in approximately a 1:1:1:1 ratio, in blocks of eight, to a consecutive series of numbers. The statistician and pharmacists had no role in assessing the participants or collecting data, and the participants, caregivers, and assessors were masked to allocation. The primary outcome measure was the MFIS measured while taking the highest tolerated dose at week 5 of each medication period, analysed by use of a linear mixed-effect regression model. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03185065 and is closed. FINDINGS: Between Oct 4, 2017, and Feb 27, 2019, of 169 patients screened, 141 patients were enrolled and randomly assigned to one of four medication administration sequences: 35 (25%) patients to the amantadine, placebo, modafinil, and methylphenidate sequence; 34 (24%) patients to the placebo, methylphenidate, amantadine, and modafinil sequence; 35 (25%) patients to the modafinil, amantadine, methylphenidate, and placebo sequence; and 37 (26%) patients to the methylphenidate, modafinil, placebo, and amantadine sequence. Data from 136 participants were available for the intention-to-treat analysis of the primary outcome. The estimated mean values of MFIS total scores at baseline and the maximal tolerated dose were as follows: 51.3 (95% CI 49.0-53.6) at baseline, 40.6 (38.2-43.1) with placebo, 41.3 (38.8-43.7) with amantadine, 39.0 (36.6-41.4) with modafinil, and 38.6 (36.2-41.0) with methylphenidate (p=0.20 for the overall medication effect in the linear mixed-effect regression model). As compared with placebo (38 [31%] of 124 patients), higher proportions of participants reported adverse events while taking amantadine (49 [39%] of 127 patients), modafinil (50 [40%] of 125 patients), and methylphenidate (51 [40%] of 129 patients). Three serious adverse events occurred during the study (pulmonary embolism and myocarditis while taking amantadine, and a multiple sclerosis exacerbation requiring hospital admission while taking modafinil). INTERPRETATION: Amantadine, modafinil, and methylphenidate were not superior to placebo in improving multiple sclerosis fatigue and caused more frequent adverse events. The results of this study do not support an indiscriminate use of amantadine, modafinil, or methylphenidate for the treatment of fatigue in multiple sclerosis. FUNDING: Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute.
This cohort study uses data from the US Provigil/Nuvigil Pregnancy Registry to assess prevalence of fetal major congenital malformations after exposure to modafinil and armodafinil during pregnancy.
Stimulants like methylphenidate, modafinil, and caffeine have repeatedly shown to enhance cognitive processes such as attention and memory. However, brain-functional mechanisms underlying such cognitive enhancing effects of stimulants are still poorly characterized. Here, we utilized behavioral and resting-state fMRI data from a double-blind randomized placebocontrolled study of methylphenidate, modafinil, and caffeine in 48 healthy male adults. The results show that performance in different memory tasks is enhanced, and functional connectivity (FC) specifically between the frontoparietal network (FPN) and default mode network (DMN) is modulated by the stimulants in comparison to placebo. Decreased negative connectivity between right prefrontal and medial parietal but also between medial temporal lobe and visual brain regions predicted stimulant-induced latent memory enhancement. We discuss dopamine's role in attention and memory as well as its ability to modulate FC between large-scale neural networks (e.g., FPN and DMN) as a potential cognitive enhancement mechanism.
This study uses pharmacoepidemiology data from Danish national health registries to examine the association between first-trimester exposure to modafinil and risk of major congenital malformations.
This pharmacoepidemiology study uses Scandinavian birth registry data to estimate the association between modafinil use during early pregnancy and major congenital malformations among infants born in Norway and Sweden between 2005-2006 and 2016-2017.
Modafinil is a nonamphetamine nootropic drug with an increasingly therapeutic interest due to its different sites of action and behavioral effects in comparison to cocaine or amphetamine. A review of modafinil (and of its prodrug adrafinil and its R-enantiomer armodafinil) chemical, pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, toxicological, clinical and forensic aspects was performed, aiming to better understand possible health problems associated to its unconscious and unruled use. Modafinil is a racemate metabolized mainly in the liver into its inactive acid and sulfone metabolites, which undergo primarily renal excretion. Although not fully clarified, major effects seem to be associated to inhibition of dopamine reuptake and modulation of several other neurochemical pathways, namely noradrenergic, serotoninergic, orexinergic, histaminergic, glutamatergic and GABAergic. Due its wake-promoting effects, modafinil is used for the treatment of daily sleepiness associated to narcolepsy, obstructive sleep apnea and shift work sleep disorder. Its psychotropic and cognitive effects are also attractive in several other pathologies and conditions that affect sleep structure, induce fatigue and lethargy, and impair cognitive abilities. Additionally, in health subjects, including students, modafinil is being used off-label to overcome sleepiness, increase concentration and improve cognitive potential. The most common adverse effects associated to modafinil intake are headache, insomnia, anxiety, diarrhea, dry mouth and raise in blood pressure and heart rate. Infrequently, severe dermatologic effects in children, including maculopapular and morbilliform rash, erythema multiforme and Stevens-Johnson Syndrome have been reported. Intoxication and dependence associated to modafinil are uncommon. Further research on effects and health implications of modafinil and its analogs is steel needed to create evidence-based policies.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common worldwide mental disorders in children, young and adults. If left untreated, the disorder can continue into adulthood. The abuse of ADHD-related drugs to improve mental performance for studying, working and everyday life is also rising. The potentially high number of subjects with controlled or uncontrolled use of such substances increases the impact of possible side effects. It has been shown before that the early ADHD drug methylphenidate influences bone metabolism negatively. This study focused on the influence of three more recent cognitive enhancers, modafinil, atomoxetine and guanfacine, on the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells to osteoblasts and on their cell functions, including migration. Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) were incubated with a therapeutic plasma dosage of modafinil, atomoxetine and guanfacine. Gene expression analyses revealed a high beta-2 adrenoreceptor expression in hMSC, suggesting it as a possible pathway to stimulate action. In bone formation assays, all three cognitive enhancers caused a significant decrease in the mineralized matrix and an early slight reduction of cell viability without triggering apoptosis or necrosis. While there was no effect of the three substances on early differentiation, they showed differing effects on the expression of osterix (OSX), receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL) and osteoprotegerin (OPG) in the later stages of osteoblast development, suggesting alternative modes of action. All three substances significantly inhibited hMSC migration. This effect could be rescued by a selective beta-blocker (Imperial Chemical Industries ICI-118,551) in modafinil and atomoxetine, suggesting mediation via beta-2 receptor stimulation. In conclusion, modafinil, atomoxetine and guanfacine negatively influence hMSC differentiation to bone-forming osteoblasts and cell migration through different intracellular pathways.
STUDY OBJECTIVES: Modafinil is a common treatment for excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) in narcolepsy. The long-term use of modafinil can lead to tolerance with the loss of efficacy and the continuous increase of its dose. Pharmacological strategies to deal with the tolerance to modafinil are lacking. We investigated the efficacy and safety of pitolisant-supported bridging during drug holidays in patients with tolerance to modafinil. METHODS: Narcolepsy patients on monotherapy with modafinil who developed symptoms of tolerance were eligible. The following alternating therapy regimen was established: Monday to Friday patients continued on modafinil whereas Saturday and Sunday they switched to pitolisant to "bridge" the EDS symptoms. Patients were assessed at baseline and after three months with the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) and the Ullanlinna Narcolepsy Scale (UNS). Health-related quality of life (HrQol) was evaluated by EuroQol5D. Adverse events were documented in the patients' diaries. RESULTS: 41 patients aged 30.9 +/- 5.6 years were included. After three months of the alternating therapy regimen, the symptoms of tolerance decreased and the modafinil dose could be reduced by 41% (p < 0.01) resulting in better safety. The EDS improved on ESS (baseline: 18.2 +/- 4.2, follow-up: 12.6 +/- 4.0, p < 0.0001) and UNS (baseline: 25.8 +/- 7.9, follow-up: 18.9 +/- 5.9, p < 0.0001). The HrQol increased significantly. CONCLUSION: Patients with tolerance to modafinil could benefit from pitolisant-supported bridging during drug holidays. This alternating pharmacological strategy proved to be safe and helped to reduce EDS and to decrease the modafinil dose. Further randomized controlled studies are required to evaluate the different strategies to deal with the tolerance to modafinil. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Clinical Trials.gov Identifier NCT05321355.
A 76-year-old man with movement disorder had a I-FP-CIT (DaTSCAN) SPECT exam demonstrating universally decreased striatal uptake. It was later determined that he had taken modafinil, and the scintigraphy was interpreted as false positive. Because of progressive symptoms, DaTSCAN was repeated 43 months later, with modafinil withheld for 7 days. Striatal uptake values were nearly doubled compared with the modafinil state and were now above normal upper limit. This suggests pharmacological upregulation of dopamine transport capacity by chronic modafinil treatment. In this setting, I-FP-CIT striatal uptake values should be interpreted with caution.
OBJECTIVE: Psychostimulants are the first-line treatment in adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the efficacy, acceptability, and tolerability of lisdexamfetamine (LDX), mixed amphetamine salts (MASs), modafinil (MDF), and methylphenidate (MPH) in comparison with placebo. DATA SOURCES: We systematically searched PubMed/MEDLINE and Clinicaltrials.gov in May 2016, along with CENTRAL and EU Clinical Trials Register in February 2016, for the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group clinical trials conducted on adults diagnosed with ADHD. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Substantial comorbidity, substance abuse or dependence, and nonpharmacological interventions represented grounds for exclusion. Published reports were the sole source for data extraction. Improvement in ADHD symptoms was the primary outcome. Random-effects model meta-analysis was applied to calculate the standardized mean difference (SMD) with 95% CIs. DATA SYNTHESIS: The search retrieved 701 records, of which 20 studies were eligible for analysis. High effect size (expressed as SMD) in reducing ADHD symptoms was observed for LDX (-0.89; 95% CI = -1.09, -0.70), whereas MASs (-0.64; 95% CI = -0.83, -0.45) and MPH (-0.50; 95% CI = -0.58, -0.41) reduced symptoms moderately compared with placebo. No efficacy was shown for MDF (0.08; 95% CI; -0.18, 0.34). Relevance to Patient Care and Clinical Practice: In this meta-analysis, the efficacy, tolerability, and acceptability of psychostimulants were compared with that for placebo. Five of the included trials have not been evaluated in any of the previously published meta-analyses. CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that LDX has the largest effect size and has a promising potential for treating adults with ADHD.
