This double-blind study was conducted to investigate the efficacy, safety and tolerability of three dose levels of moexipril in comparison to placebo as add-on therapy to hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) in patients with moderate to severe hypertension. Two hundred patients who did not respond adequately to a 4-week monotherapy with HCTZ-sitting diastolic blood pressure between 95 and 114 mm Hg- entered the 8-week double-blind period. Patients were randomized to once daily placebo or moexipril 3.75, 7.5 or 15 mg as add-on therapy to open-label HCTZ 25 mg. At biweekly visits, blood pressure and heart rate measurements were obtained and the occurrence of adverse experiences was documented. At the 8-week endpoint, adjusted mean reductions from baseline were significantly (p = 0.003) greater in patients receiving moexipril 3.75, 7.5 and 15 mg compared to placebo (-8.4, -8.8 and -8.9 vs. -4.6 mm Hg). No significant differences between the three dose levels of moexipril could be observed. Moexipril was generally well tolerated. The most frequently reported adverse events for moexipril and placebo were headache, flu syndrome and dizziness (6, 7, 5 vs. 4, 0, 4%). The results indicate that the combination of moexipril and HCTZ is a clinically valuable combination in the treatment of patients with moderate to severe hypertension.
Co-administration of antihypertensive drug therapy and hormonal replacement therapy (HRT) is frequent in postmenopausal women but it is not known whether HRT interacts with concomitant antihypertensive therapy. The present study was designed to investigate efficacy and safety of the ACE inhibitor moexipril in comparison to placebo in hypertensive, postmenopausal women on HRT. After a 4-week placebo run-in phase, 95 postmenopausal women (35-74 years of age) who had a sitting diastolic blood pressure (BP) of 95-114 mm Hg and were treated with HRT were randomised to a 12-week treatment with moexipril 15 mg or placebo. Efficacy and safety were assessed by measuring changes in sitting BP and metabolic parameters associated with cardiovascular disease including triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, total cholesterol/HDL ratio and glucose. Adverse events were recorded continuously. After 12 weeks of treatment, moexipril 15 mg was significantly more effective in reducing sitting systolic and diastolic BP from baseline than placebo (-12.2/-9.9 mm Hg vs -1.6/-4.3 mm Hg, P < 0.001). Metabolic parameters were not affected by treatment with moexipril: mean levels of triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, total cholesterol/HDL ratio and glucose remained unchanged throughout the study. Fibrinogen, an independent cardiovascular risk factor, increased after placebo (+35.0 mg/dl) and decreased after treatment with moexipril (-33.6 mg/dl), the difference, however, was not statistically significant. Moexipril was well-tolerated by postmenopausal women using HRT. The most frequent adverse events included headache (21.3%), cough (12.8%) and rhinitis (10.6%) and there were no significant differences in the number and severity of adverse events between the moexipril and placebo groups. This study indicates that moexipril is effective and well tolerated in the treatment of hypertensive, postmenopausal women and can safely be co-administered to HRT.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the antihypertensive efficacy of moexipril, a new angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, to treatment with hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ). PATIENTS: Two hundred and one non-hospitalized male and female patients between 65 and 80 years of age with essential hypertension. METHODS: This was a multicentre, placebo-controlled, double-blind study with a parallel group design. Subjects with a sitting diastolic blood pressure (DBP) > or = 95 mmHg were randomized to monotherapy with placebo, moexipiril 7.5 mg o.d., moexipril 15 mg o.d. or HCTZ 25 mg o.d. for 8 weeks. RESULTS: Throughout the study period treatment with moexipril and HCTZ resulted in significant reductions of DBP compared with placebo, but there were no significant differences between the active treatment groups. At end point the adjusted mean reductions were 10.5, 8.7 and 10.1 mmHg in the HCTZ, moexipril 7.5 mg and moexipril 15 mg groups, respectively, compared to 3.9 mmHg in the placebo group. Treatment with moexipril was associated with two cases of first dose hypotension and two cases of moderate and reversible increases in serum creatinine levels. Otherwise, both dosages of moexipril were well tolerated and the overall percentages of patients who had adverse experiences were smaller than in the placebo group. CONCLUSION: Moexipril is well tolerated and is at least as effective as HCTZ in elderly patients with essential hypertension.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the long-term safety and efficacy of moexipril, a non-sulphydryl angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, alone or in combination with hydrochlorothiazide in older patients with hypertension. One hundred and seventy two hypertensive men and women, 65-80 years old, with seated DBP between 95 and 114 mm Hg were studied. The study was a 2 year, multicentre (12 centres), open-label protocol of moexipril monotherapy or combination therapy (with hydrochlorothiazide). Blood pressure, pulse rate, weight, adverse effects and laboratory studies were assessed following moexipril at 7.5 or 15 mg once daily or 7.5 or 15 mg daily in combination with 25 mg of hydrochlorothiazide if the seated DBP remained > or = 90 mm Hg on moexipril monotherapy. The primary measure of efficacy was a change from baseline in seated DBP. Secondary outcome measures included changes in seated DBP, pulse rate, laboratory parameters and adverse side-effects. Following 1 year of therapy in 135 patients, the BP fell 16/14 mm Hg among patients receiving moexipril monotherapy and 27/17 mm Hg for those receiving combined therapy compared with baseline (P < 0.001 for both). After 2 years of treatment, reductions were similar in 120 patients. Nineteen patients (11%) were prematurely withdrawn from the study because of inadequate therapeutic response and 28 (16%) because of adverse experiences. There were no significant changes in pulse rate or postural reductions in BP on either moexipril monotherapy or combination treatment. Three adverse side-effects occurred at a frequency exceeding 2% that were possibly or probably attributable to moexipril or combination therapy: hypotension (2%), dizziness (6%) and increased cough (12%). There were no clinically relevant mean group changes from baseline laboratory values in the treatment groups. In conclusion, these long-term data demonstrate that moexipril, either alone or in combination with hydrochlorothiazide, has long-term anti-hypertensive efficacy and is generally well tolerated in elderly patients with hypertension.
The electrochemistry of moexipril (MOE) was studied by electrochemical methods with theoretical calculations performed at B3LYP/6-31 + G (d)//AM1. Cyclic voltammetric studies were carried out based on a reversible and adsorption-controlled reduction peak at -1.35 V on a hanging mercury drop electrode (HMDE). Concurrently irreversible diffusion-controlled oxidation peak at 1.15 V on glassy carbon electrode (GCE) was also employed. Potential values are according to Ag/AgCI, (3.0 M KCI) and measurements were performed in Britton-Robinson buffer of pH 5.5. Tentative electrode mechanisms were proposed according to experimental results and ab-initio calculations. Square-wave adsorptive stripping voltammetric methods have been developed and validated for quantification of MOE in pharmaceutical preparations. Linear working range was established as 0.03-1.35 microM for HMDE and 0.2-20.0 microM for GCE. Limit of quantification (LOQ) was calculated to be 0.032 and 0.47 microM for HMDE and GCE, respectively. Methods were successfully applied to assay the drug in tablets by calibration and standard addition methods with good recoveries between 97.1% and 106.2% having relative standard deviation less than 10%.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy and tolerability of the new angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor moexipril and the calcium antagonist nitrendipine in postmenopausal women with mild to moderate hypertension. METHODS: After a 4-week placebo run-in period, 93 postmenopausal women (age range 44-70 years) with primary hypertension were randomized to receive moexipril 15 mg once daily or nitrendipine 20 mg once daily for 8 weeks. The mean sitting systolic (SSBP) and sitting diastolic blood pressures (SDBP) at baseline were 161.3/103.0 mmHg in the moexipril group, and 162.2/102.3 mmHg in the nitrendipine group. RESULTS: After the 8 weeks of treatment, the SSBP/SDBP reductions were -21.2/-15.2 mmHg in the moexipril group and -18.2/-13.6 mmHg in the nitrendipine group. Blood pressure responses were adequate in 82.2% of the moexipril-treated patients and in 80.9% in the nitrendipine-treated group. Adverse events were more frequent with nitrendipine than with moexipril. The most common adverse events in the nitrendipine group were headache (23.4%), flushing (21.3%) and ankle oedema (14.9%). In the moexipril group the most common adverse event was cough (8.9%). CONCLUSION: The results of the study suggest that moexipril and nitrendipine are equieffective in the given dosages. In the patient population of postmenopausal women, the ACE inhibitor moexipril appears to have an advantage over the calcium antagonist nitrendipine with regard to tolerability.
A rapid, linear (over a concentration range of 0.00012-0.0012% and with correlation coefficient r = 0.999), accurate (an average recovery of 100%), precise (an average standard deviation < 1.5%) and economical first derivative UV spectrophotometric assay method (lambda(max) = 238 nm) was developed for the determination of moexipril hydrochloride (MOXL) in a pharmaceutical formulation. The method was investigated for its utility for the determination of MOXL in commercially available tablets and as a stability-indicative assay in solid state. The results obtained by means of the investigated method were statistically compared (t-Student test and F-Snedecor test) with the results obtained by means of the reference method--HPLC, which evidenced that both methods are equally precise and accurate. It was finally concluded that first derivative UV spectrophotometry is selective with reference to excipients used for the tablets' formulation, however, it is not selective with reference to MOXL degradation products.
The antihypertensive effects of moexipril, a new angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, and verapamil-SR as add-on therapy to hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) were investigated in patients with moderate to severe (stages II and III) essential hypertension. Of 147 patients treated for 4 weeks with 25 mg/day HCTZ, 108 whose sitting diastolic blood pressure (SDBP) was 100 to 114 mm Hg inclusive were randomized to 7.5 mg/day moexipril (56 patients) and 180 mg/day verapamil-SR (52 patients) in addition to 25 mg/day HCTZ. If after 4 weeks of treatment the SDBP was > or = 90 mm Hg, the dose of moexipril was increased to 15 mg/day and that of verapamil-SR increased to 240 mg/day; the patients were followed for an additional 8 weeks. Blood chemistries, plasma renin activity, and plasma aldosterone were done during the study. Both moexipril and verapamil-SR were safe and well tolerated and decreased the sitting and standing blood pressure similarly (P < .001). This study demonstrated that the addition of moexipril and verapamil-SR to low dose HCTZ is effective for the treatment of moderate to severe hypertension.
Three simple, accurate, reproducible, and selective methods have been developed and subsequently validated for the simultaneous determination of Moexipril (MOX) and Hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) in pharmaceutical dosage form. The first method is the new extended ratio subtraction method (EXRSM) coupled to ratio subtraction method (RSM) for determination of both drugs in commercial dosage form. The second and third methods are multivariate calibration which include Principal Component Regression (PCR) and Partial Least Squares (PLSs). A detailed validation of the methods was performed following the ICH guidelines and the standard curves were found to be linear in the range of 10-60 and 2-30 for MOX and HCTZ in EXRSM method, respectively, with well accepted mean correlation coefficient for each analyte. The intra-day and inter-day precision and accuracy results were well within the acceptable limits.
Two new simple and selective assay methods have been presented for the binary mixtures of moexipril hydrochloride (MOEX) and hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) in pharmaceutical formulations. The first method depends on second-derivative ultraviolet spectrophotometry with zero-crossing measurements at 215 and 234 nm for MOEX and HCTZ, respectively. The assay was linear over the concentration ranges 1.0-11.0 microg ml(-1) for MOEX and 0.5-9.0 microg ml(-1) for HCTZ. The determination limits for MOEX and HCTZ were found to be 1.0 and 0.5 microg ml(-1), respectively; while the detection limits were 0.2 microg ml(-1) for MOEX and 0.1 microg ml(-1) for HCTZ. The second method was based on isocratic reversed-phase liquid chromatography by using a mobile phase acetonitrile-20 mM phosphate buffer (pH 4.0) (50:50, v/v). Lisinopril was used as an internal standard (IS) and the substances were detected at 212 nm. The linearity range for both drugs was 0.5-12.0 microg ml(-1). The determination and detection limits were found to be 0.100 and 0.010 microg ml(-1) for MOEX and 0.025 and 0.005 microg ml(-1) for HCTZ, respectively. The proposed methods were successfully applied to the determination of these drugs in synthetic mixtures and commercially available tablets with a high percentage recovery, good accuracy and precision.
A sensitive and selective method for the simultaneous determination of moexipril and moexiprilat, its active metabolite, in human plasma is described using quinapril and quinaprilat as internal standards. The analytes are isolated from human plasma by means of Bond Elut C18 cartridges, methylated with diazomethane, purified by acid-base partitioning and converted to the corresponding trifluoroacetamides using trifluoroacetic anhydride. Moexipril and moexiprilat were analysed by gas chromatography-negative-ion chemical ionization mass spectrometry (GC-NICI-MS) at the fragment ions m/z 302 and m/z 288, respectively. The lower limit of quantitation both for moexipril and moexiprilat is 0.5 ng/ml of human plasma. Linear calibration curves are obtained over the concentration range 0.5-300 ng/ml of human plasma. In any case the imprecision and the inaccuracy are < 15%. The present method has been successfully applied to various pharmacokinetic studies in human subjects and patients.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the lipophilic ACE inhibitor moexipril and its active metabolite moexiprilat regarding the duration of action, the susceptibility of the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics to food intake and the concentration-dependent effect. METHODS: Three independent, open, randomized studies were performed in healthy subjects using crossover or parallel-group designs. In the first study, pharmacokinetics (AUC, Cmax, tmax, t 1/2) and ACE inhibition (up to 72 h) were investigated following single oral doses of 15 mg moexipril administered in the fasting and postprandial state (n = 24). The individual ACE inhibition data and plasma concentration data were fitted to an Emax model. In the second study, carried out in 52 volunteers, the pharmacokinetics were followed over 36 h following administration of 2 single oral doses of 15 mg moexipril. In the third study, the pharmacokinetics after multiple dosing of 15 mg moexipril once daily for 5 days were investigated in 12 young and 12 elderly subjects. RESULTS: Moexiprilat tmax was 1.5-2 h with only minor differences between single and multiple dosing. Compared to fasting, the postprandial moexiprilat Cmax and AUC (ratio fed/fasted 58.0%; 90% CI 52.2-64.5%) were distinctly reduced (ANOVA p = 0.0001). Moexiprilat showed a biphasic elimination phase with an average t 1/2 of 29-30 h. In contrast to the alpha-phase, the plasma concentrations during the terminal elimination phase were not affected by food. A relationship between ACE inhibition and plasma concentration was not observed. The average ACE inhibition over 72 h was 71 % in the fasting state and 74% in the postprandial state. ACE inhibition increased to about 80% after 24 h and decreased to about 60% at 72 h. The S-shaped concentration-effect curve indicated that a moexiprilat level of 1.3 ng/ml was sufficient to produce 50% inhibition of ACE. With repeated dosing there were no signs of drug accumulation and day-to-day drug levels were relatively constant. The trough concentrations at 24 h did not fall below the limit of 1-2 ng/ml, i.e. a 50% ACE inhibition. CONCLUSION: Moexiprilat showed an extended duration of action owing to a long terminal pharmacokinetic half-life and produced a persistent ACE inhibition. Although the pharmacokinetics were partly influenced by food intake, ACE inhibition was not affected. This might be explained by a second compartment directly related to the ACE which is less prone to food effects and the reaching of a ceiling in the sigmoidal concentration-effect curve even with the lower Cmax concentrations associated with the postprandial state.
The drug-excipient incompatibility screen for moexipril hydrochloride (1) using various isothermal stress methods is reported herein. It was found that most of the commonly used filters, disintegrants, lubricants, glidants, and coating agents were incompatible with 1 in dry powder mixtures; moisture and basic (or alkalizing) agents were determined to be the dominant destabilizing factors. In wet granulations, basic agents, however, were found to suppress drug degradation even in the presence of moisture. Supported by the product distribution studies, the stabilization is proposed to involve the neutralization of the acidic drug by the basic excipients.
ACE inhibitors induce metabolic changes and exert cardioprotective and vasoprotective properties, some of which cannot be attributed to their antihypertensive effect per se. Moexipril is an ACE inhibitor with a lipophilicity in the same range as quinapril, benazepril or ramipril, and so can readily penetrate lipid membranes and thus target tissue ACE in addition to plasma ACE. Evidence from animal studies shows similar and significant (p < 0.05) reductions in tissue ACE activity for moexipril and quinapril. Moexipril may improve endothelial dysfunction; moexiprilat and ramiprilat have demonstrated greater activity than captopril, enalaprilat and quinaprilat in isolated endothelium-denuded segments of the rabbit jugular vein where bradykinin elicits a constrictor response, mediated by activation of the bradykinin B(2) receptor. ACE inhibitors, including moexipril, may exert neuroprotective effects. Moexipril promoted neuronal survival in vitro and it is thought that this neuroprotective effect is due to free radical scavenging properties of the drug. ACE inhibitors can also decrease progression of renal insufficiency in patients with various underlying renal diseases. Moexipril may also have a renoprotective effect as it increased the ultrafiltration coefficient and normalized urinary protein excretion in rat models. Preclinical studies indicate that the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system may play a role in the regulation of bone resorption and moexipril had no adverse effects on bone metabolism in animal models and the drug did not hamper the osteoprotective effects of estrogen. Reduction in left ventricular mass with moexipril in patients with hypertension was similar in magnitude to the effect of other ACE inhibitors. When investigated in hypertensive patients with an elevated cardiovascular risk, moexipril increased arterial distensibility and demonstrated antioxidative properties in addition to efficiently controlling blood pressure. Moexipril does not adversely affect serum levels of uric acid, lipids, blood glucose levels and plasma insulin levels and can be co-administered with hormone replacement therapy. Moreover, quality-of-life data suggest favorable effects of moexipril treatment in a patient population at high cardiovascular risk.
A simple, rapid and sensitive liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry method was developed and validated for the quantification of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, moexipril, in human plasma. Benazepril was used as an internal standard (IS). Analyte and IS were extracted from the human plasma by liquid-liquid extraction technique using ethyl acetate. The reconstituted samples were chromatographed on a C(1)(8) column by using a mixture of methanol and 0.1% formic acid buffer (85:15, v/v) as the mobile phase at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. The calibration curve obtained was linear (r >/= 0.99) over the concentration range of 0.2-204 ng/mL. The multiple reaction-monitoring mode was used for quantification of ion transitions at m/z 499.4/234.2 and 425.2/351.1 for moexipril and IS, respectively. The results of the intra- and inter-day precision and accuracy studies were well within the acceptable limits. A run time of 2.0 min for each sample made it possible to analyze more than 400 plasma samples per day. The proposed method was found to be applicable to clinical studies.
Moexipril is a prodrug which is hydrolysed after oral administration to its active metabolite moexiprilat, an inhibitor of the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE). Once daily administration of moexipril 7.5 or 15 mg effectively reduces blood pressure in patients with essential hypertension (including the elderly and postmenopausal women with this condition). In double-blind randomised comparative studies, moexipril 7.5 to 15 mg once daily showed similar efficacy to other antihypertensive agents, including captopril, hydrochlorothiazide, atenolol, metoprolol, sustained release verapamil and nitrendipine. Combined therapy with hydrochlorothiazide and moexipril had a significantly greater antihypertensive effect than either agent alone. Moexipril is well tolerated by the majority of patients and compares well in this respect with other antihypertensive agents. Its tolerability profile appears to be characteristic of ACE inhibitors as a class (the most common adverse events being headache, symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection and cough). Moexipril generally had no clinically significant effect on lipid, glucose or electrolyte metabolism or haematological parameters, and, in particular, it was not associated with any significant changes in lipid or glucose metabolism in postmenopausal women (with or without hormone replacement therapy). CONCLUSIONS: Once daily moexipril is a useful agent for the treatment of essential hypertension, which compares well with currently available options in terms of clinical efficacy and tolerability. In addition, clinical experience to date supports its use in postmenopausal women.
