This article summarizes the current knowledge about the presence of naproxen in the environment, its toxicity to nontarget organisms and the microbial degradation of this drug. Currently, naproxen has been detected in all types of water, including drinking water and groundwater. The concentrations that have been observed ranged from ng/L to mug/L. These concentrations, although low, may have a negative effect of long-term exposure on nontarget organisms, especially when naproxen is mixed with other drugs. The biological decomposition of naproxen is performed by fungi, algae and bacteria, but the only well-described pathway for its complete degradation is the degradation of naproxen by Bacillus thuringiensis B1(2015b). The key intermediates that appear during the degradation of naproxen by this strain are O-desmethylnaproxen and salicylate. This latter is then cleaved by 1,2-salicylate dioxygenase or is hydroxylated to gentisate or catechol. These intermediates can be cleaved by the appropriate dioxygenases, and the resulting products are incorporated into the central metabolism. KEY POINTS: *High consumption of naproxen is reflected in its presence in the environment. *Prolonged exposure of nontargeted organisms to naproxen can cause adverse effects. *Naproxen biodegradation occurs mainly through desmethylnaproxen as a key intermediate.
Herein, we review the recent progress in the synthesis of representative nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), ibuprofen and naproxen. Although these drugs were discovered over 50 years ago, novel practical and asymmetric approaches are still being developed for their synthesis. In addition, this endeavor has enabled access to more potent and selective derivatives from the key frameworks of ibuprofen and naproxen. The development of a synthetic route to ibuprofen and naproxen over the last 10 years is summarized, including developing methodologies, finding novel synthetic routes, and applying continuous-flow chemistry.
This review explains the effects of naproxen and the naproxen moiety in important biological activities. Naproxen, 2-(6-methoxynaphthalen-2-yl)propionic acid, is one of the most utilized propionic acid derivatives to the cure of many injuries or pains. Naproxen is a non-steroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID), which is generally used among the NSAIDs. Even though it has gastrointestinal side effects, naproxen has been safely used for many years because of the good cardiovascular sight. In the past years, except for anti-inflammatory effects, other pharmacological activities of naproxen, especially anticancer and antimicrobial activities, gain the attention of researchers. Naproxen shows its activity by inhibiting the COX-2 enzyme. There is significant interest in the possibility that COX-2 inhibitors might retard or prevent the development of various cancer types, which is often characterized by COX-2 expression. The activities of both naproxen and new molecules derived from naproxen were frequently investigated.
Naproxen is a stereochemically pure nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug of the 2-arylpropionic acid class. The absorption of naproxen is rapid and complete when given orally. Naproxen binds extensively, in a concentration-dependent manner, to plasma albumin. The area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of naproxen is linearly proportional to the dose for oral doses up to a total dose of 500 mg. At doses greater than 500 mg there is an increase in the unbound fraction of drug, leading to an increased renal clearance of total naproxen while unbound renal clearance remains unchanged. Substantial concentrations of the drug are attained in synovial fluid, which is a proposed site of action for nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Relationships between the total and unbound plasma concentration, unbound synovial fluid concentration and therapeutic effect have been established. Naproxen is eliminated following biotransformation to glucuroconjugated and sulphate metabolites which are excreted in urine, with only a small amount of the drug being eliminated unchanged. The excretion of the 6-O-desmethylnaproxen metabolite conjugate may be tied to renal function, as accumulation occurs in end-stage renal disease but does not appear to be influenced by age. Hepatic disease and rheumatoid arthritis can also significantly alter the disposition kinetics of naproxen. Although naproxen is excreted into breast milk the amount of drug transferred comprises only a small fraction of the maternal exposure. Significant drug interactions have been demonstrated for probenecid, lithium and methotrexate.
BACKGROUND: Postoperative pain is often poorly managed. Treatment options include a range of drug therapies such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) of which naproxen is one. Naproxen is used to treat a variety of painful conditions including acute postoperative pain, and is often combined with sodium to improve its solubility for oral administration. Naproxen sodium 550 mg (equivalent to 500 mg of naproxen) is considered to be an effective dose for treating postoperative pain but to date no systematic review of the effectiveness of naproxen/naproxen sodium at different doses has been published. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy, safety and duration of action of a single oral dose of naproxen or naproxen sodium for acute postoperative pain in adults. SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched The Cochrane Library, MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Oxford Pain Relief Database for relevant studies. Additional studies were identified from the reference list of retrieved reports. The most recent search was undertaken in July 2004. SELECTION CRITERIA: Included studies were randomised, double blind, placebo-controlled trials of a single dose of orally administered naproxen or naproxen sodium in adults with moderate to severe acute postoperative pain. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Pain relief or pain intensity data were extracted and converted into dichotomous information to give the number of patients with at least 50% pain relief over four to six hours. Relative risk estimates (RR) and the number-needed-to-treat (NNT) for at least 50% pain relief were then calculated. Information was sought on the percentage of patients experiencing any adverse event, and the number-needed-to-harm was derived. Time to remedication was also estimated. MAIN RESULTS: Ten trials (996 patients) met the inclusion criteria: nine assessed naproxen sodium; one combined the results from two small trials of naproxen alone. Included studies scored well for methodological quality. Meta-analysis of six trials (500 patients) that compared naproxen sodium 550 mg with placebo gave a RR for at least 50% pain relief over 4 to 6 hours of 4.2 (95% confidence interval (CI) 2.9 to 6.0) and an NNT of 2.6 (95% CI 2.2 to 3.2). Three trials (334 patients) assessed naproxen 400 mg and naproxen sodium 440 mg, giving a RR of 4.8 (95% CI 2.75 to 8.38). Two small studies indicated that naproxen 200 mg and naproxen sodium 220 mg may provide effective postoperative pain relief. There was no significant difference between the number of patients experiencing any adverse event on treatment compared with placebo. Weighted mean time to remedication for naproxen sodium 550 mg was 7.6 hours compared with 2.6 hours for placebo. REVIEWERS' CONCLUSIONS: Naproxen sodium 550 mg, naproxen 400 mg and naproxen sodium 440 mg administered orally are effective analgesics for the treatment of acute postoperative pain in adults. A low incidence of adverse events was found but reporting was not consistent.
BACKGROUND: Naproxen, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, is used to treat various painful conditions including postoperative pain, and is often administered as the sodium salt to improve its solubility. This review updates a 2004 Cochrane review showing that naproxen sodium 550 mg (equivalent to naproxen 500 mg) was effective for treating postoperative pain. New studies have since been published. OBJECTIVES: To assess efficacy, duration of action, and associated adverse events of single dose oral naproxen or naproxen sodium in acute postoperative pain in adults. SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched Cochrane CENTRAL, MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Oxford Pain Relief Database for studies to October 2008. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised, double blind, placebo-controlled trials of single dose orally administered naproxen or naproxen sodium in adults with moderate to severe acute postoperative pain. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trial quality and extracted data. Pain relief or pain intensity data were extracted and converted into the dichotomous outcome of number of participants with at least 50% pain relief over four to six hours, from which relative risk and number-needed-to-treat-to-benefit (NNT) were calculated. Numbers of participants using rescue medication over specified time periods, and time to use of rescue medication, were sought as additional measures of efficacy. Information on adverse events and withdrawals were collected. MAIN RESULTS: The original review included 10 studies with 996 participants. This updated review included 15 studies (1509 participants); 11 assessed naproxen sodium and four naproxen. In nine studies (784 participants) using 500/550 mg naproxen or naproxen sodium the NNT for at least 50% pain relief over four to six hours was 2.7 (95% CI 2.3 to 3.2). No dose response was demonstrated over the range 200/220 mg to 500/550 mg, but limited data was identified. Median time to use of rescue medication was 8.9 hours for naproxen 500/550 mg and 2.0 hours for placebo. Use of rescue medication was significantly less common with naproxen than placebo. Associated adverse events were generally of mild to moderate severity and rarely led to withdrawal. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Doses equivalent to 500 mg and 400 mg naproxen administered orally provided effective analgesia to adults with moderate to severe acute postoperative pain. About half of participants treated with these doses experienced clinically useful levels of pain relief, compared to 15% with placebo, and half required additional medication within nine hours, compared to two hours with placebo. Associated adverse events did not differ from placebo.
The photochemical degradation of the pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) has attracted increasing attention. In this study, a deep inspection of the photolysis mechanisms of naproxen and its photoproducts has been performed by employing experimental and theoretical methods. Contributions of different reactive oxygen species (ROS, such as OH, (1)O(2), and O(2)(-)) in the photolysis reaction also have been clarified. Based on the detected intermediates and DFT calculations, several photodegradation pathways of naproxen and its photoproducts have been proved. Furthermore, the deprotonated form of naproxen has been confirmed to be more reactive than the protonated one, and the lowest triplet state of naproxen is the reactive state. The decarboxylation mechanism of naproxen has been fully discussed. Meanwhile, the free energy barriers of OH-induced photolysis reactions (DeltaG(double dagger)(eff(1a)) = 7.6 kcal mol(-1), DeltaG(double dagger)(eff(4a)) = 7.0 kcal mol(-1)) are much lower than the free energy barriers induced by O(2)(-) and (1)O(2). It proves that OH is the most favourable one among the three ROS. The similar inhabition rates and free energy barriers of reactions induced by O(2)(-) and (1)O(2), respectively, have demonstrated that O(2)(-) and (1)O(2) equally contribute to the degradation. Additionally, the computational results are coincident with the observed experimental findings. Hence, this work has verified a part of naproxen photodegradation mechanism under UV irradiation and brought about a rational way to investigate contributions of different ROS in the complex photochemical system of PPCPs.
BACKGROUND: The effect of naproxen on the treatment of neoplastic fever is still unclear. A systematic review and meta-analysis were performed to investigate the effect of naproxen in the treatment of cancer fever or suspicion. Besides, the latest and most convincing evidence was provided for the earlier use of naproxen in treating cancer patients with fever of unknown origin. METHODS: A literature review was conducted to identify all published studies on the naproxen for the treatment of neoplastic fever. Electronic databases (eg, PUBMED, EMBASE and the Cochrane Library) were searched until October 2018. Data were extracted, and the risk of bias was assessed by 2 authors independently. Standard meta-analyses on the rate of successful treatment were conducted using a random-effects model, and relative risks were calculated with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). RESULTS: A total of 15 studies, recruiting 582 participants, were included, which were 1 randomized controlled trial (RCT), 1 non-RCT, 3 cross-sectional studies, and 10 case-series studies. The result of our meta-analysis revealed that the success rate on the treatment of neoplastic fever using naproxen was 94.1% (95% CI: 87.6%-97.3%). The success rate of the suspected neoplastic fever was 79.8%; for fever of unknown origin, it also reached 67.7%. In this meta-analysis, the success rate was 98.1% (95% CI: 95.0%-99.3%) in the dosage of 250 mg twice a day. Besides, a small dose of 125 mg naproxen, 375 mg twice a day and 250 mg 3 times a day were also useful. The result of the subgroup analysis revealed that the difference was not statistically significant in the treatment success rate for solid tumors and hematologic malignant. CONCLUSIONS: The result of our meta-analysis suggested that naproxen exhibited a highly successful rate for the treatment of neoplastic fever. Besides, naproxen was also satisfactory in improving symptoms of suspected neoplastic fever and fever of unknown origin. The earlier use of naproxen might be able to mitigate cancer patient's suffering and enhanced their quality of life. These findings, however, rely primarily on observational data and should be interpreted rigorously. Further well-conducted trials are required to assess naproxen for the treatment of neoplastic fever.
Improvement of the physicochemical properties of amorphous active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) applying the concept of co-amorphisation is a promising alternative to the use of polymer glass solutions. In co-amorphous systems, the physical stability and the dissolution rate of the involved components may be improved in comparison to the respective single amorphous phases. However, for the co-amorphous naproxen-indomethacin model system it has been reported that recrystallization could not be prevented for more than 112days regardless of the applied preparation method and blend ratio In the present study, it was thus tested if the physicochemical properties of co-amorphous naproxen-indomethacin could be optimized by incorporation of the naproxen sodium into the system. Three different co-amorphous systems in nine different molar ratios were prepared by quench-cooling: naproxen-indomethacin (NI), naproxen-sodium-naproxen-indomethacin (NSNI) and naproxen-sodium-indomethacin (NSI). The samples were analyzed by XRPD, FTIR, DSC and by intrinsic dissolution experiments to investigate the influence of naproxen-sodium on the resulting physicochemical properties of the systems. With the three systems, fully amorphous samples with single glass transition temperatures could be prepared with naproxen molar fractions up to 0.7. The NSI and NSNI systems showed up to about 40 degrees C higher Tgs than the NI system. Furthermore, no recrystallization occurred during 270d of storage with the NSI and NSNI samples that were initially amorphous. Moreover, with the NSI system, the intrinsic dissolution rate of naproxen and indomethacin was improved by a factor of 2 compared to the unmodified NI system. In conclusion, the physical stability as well as the dissolution rate was significantly improved if partial or full exchange of naproxen by its sodium salt was performed, which may present a general optimization method to improve co-amorphous systems.
To improve the dissolution properties and the physical stability of amorphous active pharmaceutical ingredients, small molecule stabilizing agents may be added to prepare co-amorphous systems. The objective of the study was to investigate if spray-drying allows the preparation of co-amorphous drug-drug systems such as naproxen-indomethacin and to examine the influence of the process conditions on the resulting initial sample crystallinity and the recrystallization behavior of the drug(s). For this purpose, the process parameters inlet temperature and pump feed rate were varied according to a 2(2) factorial design and the obtained samples were analyzed with X-ray powder diffractometry and Fourier-transformed infrared spectroscopy. Evaluation of the data revealed that the preparation of fully amorphous samples could be achieved depending on the process conditions. The resulting recrystallization behavior of the samples, such as the total recrystallization rate, the individual recrystallization rates of naproxen and indomethacin as well as the polymorphic form of indomethacin that was formed were influenced by these process conditions. For initially amorphous samples, it was found that naproxen and indomethacin recrystallized almost simultaneously, which supports the theory of formation of drug-drug heterodimers in the co-amorphous phase.
In this work, the tabletability and dissolution of spray-dried forms of naproxen and its sodium salt were compared with those of unprocessed drugs. Solutions of naproxen or naproxen sodium alone or with HPMC (5% w/w of drug content) were spray dried. Scanning electron micrographs showed that naproxen sodium spray-dried particles were spherical, whereas those of naproxen were non-spherical but isodiametric. Powder x-ray diffraction and thermal analysis indicated that co-spray drying with HPMC resulted in reduced crystallinity of naproxen and higher naproxen sodium dihydrate content. FTIR and Raman analysis showed shifting, merging or elimination of bands in the spectra of the co-spray dried products signifying solid-state alterations. When mixed with suitable processing aids (7% w/w), all co-spray dried powders produced satisfactory tablets in the pressure range 73-295 MPa. Conversely, physical mixtures of naproxen compressed with the same aids failed tableting, whereas naproxen sodium produced weak tablets. Dissolution tests showed significant improvement for co-spray dried drugs tablets. Therefore, since the large therapeutic doses of naproxen and sodium naproxen limit the use of tableting aids, the improved compaction and dissolution performance of the spray-dried forms may be a formulation alternative.
In patients suspected of having drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia, antibodies reactive with normal platelets in the presence of the suspect drug can sometimes be identified, but negative results are often obtained. One reason for this is that drug metabolites, formed in vivo, can be the sensitizing agents, but very little is known about the specific metabolites that can cause this complication. Five patients were studied who developed thrombocytopenia after taking the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug naproxen (3 cases) or acetaminophen (2 cases) but in whom drug-dependent antibodies could not be detected by means of the unmodified drugs. In each case, antibodies that reacted with normal target platelets in the presence of a known drug metabolite (naproxen glucuronide or acetaminophen sulfate) were identified. Four of the antibodies were specific for the glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa complex, but one acetaminophen sulfate-dependent antibody reacted preferentially with GPIb/IX/V. In patients with a clinical picture suggestive of drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia, tests for metabolite-dependent antibodies can be helpful in identifying the responsible agent. (Blood. 2001;97:3846-3850)
Thirty patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee were entered into a double-blind, cross-over study of naproxen (750 mg/day) and sulindac (400 mg/day) both given in twice-daily regimens. Patients received each drug for four weeks. Both drugs produced improvements in the patients' overall condition. There were no statistically significant differences between the effects of the two drugs. There were few side-effects. Overall, both drugs proved beneficial and safe.
The intercalation DNA binding mode of the naproxen, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, has been reported previously. In this study, calf thymus deoxyribonucleic acid (CT-DNA) binding of zinc-naproxen complex, [Zn(naproxen)(2)(MeOH)(2)], at physiological pH has been investigated by multi-spectroscopic techniques and molecular docking. Zinc-naproxen complex displays significant binding property to the CT-DNA (K(b) = 0.2  x  10(5) L.mol(-1)). All of the experimental results; relative increasing in viscosity of CT-DNA and fluorimetric studies using ethidium bromide (EB) and Hoechst 33258 probes, are indicative of groove binding mode of zinc-naproxen complex to CT-DNA. These results show that the coordination of naproxen to zinc metal switches the mode of binding from intercalation to groove. The molecular modeling also shows that the complex binds to the AT-rich region of minor groove of DNA. Structural and topography changes of DNA in interaction with the complex by atomic force microscopy (AFM) indicated that CT-DNA becomes swollen after interaction. The pUC18 plasmid DNA cleavage ability of zinc-naproxen complex by gel electrophoresis experiments revealed that zinc-naproxen complex cleaved supercoiled pUC18 plasmid DNA to nicked DNA. The cytotoxicity of the zinc complex performed by MTT method on HT29 and MCF7 cancer cell lines and on HEK 293 normal cell lines indicates that zinc complex has no cytotoxic effect on both HT29 and MCF7 cell lines but has better cytotoxicity effect on HEK 293 cell lines compared to cisplatin standard drug. The antimicrobial activity of the complex against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli bacteria revealed the high antimicrobial activity of the complex.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.
The use of CO(2) as a C1 carbon source for synthesis is raising increasing attention both as a strategy to bring value to carbon dioxide capture technologies and a sustainable approach towards chemicals and energy. The presented results focus on the application of electrochemical methods to incorporate CO(2) into organic compounds using ionic liquids as electrolytes, which provides a green alternative to the formation of C-C bonds. In this sense, the current manuscript shows that Naproxen (6-Methoxy-alpha-methyl-2-naphthaleneacetic acid) can be synthetizing in high yield (89%) and conversion rates (90%) through an electrocarboxylation process using CO(2) and ionic liquids. The role of the cathode and solvent, which can potentially enhance the synthesis, is also discussed. The "green" route described in the current work would open a new sustainable strategy for the electrochemical production of pharmaceutical compounds.
