Acquisition of nevirapine (NVP)-resistant human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) by breast-feeding infants after receipt of single-dose NVP to prevent mother-to-child transmission is not well defined. A prospective observational study of 307 infants evaluated the rate of breast milk transmission of NVP-resistant HIV and the concentrations of mutants over time. NVP resistance was detected in 9 of 24 infants (37.5%; 95% confidence interval, 18.8%-59.4%) infected via breast milk. Eight had a pure mutant HIV population at the time infection was first detected, and majority mutant populations persisted in all 6 infants with follow-up specimens. Infection of breast-feeding infants with NVP-resistant HIV resulted in mutants persisting as the dominant virus, which may indefinitely compromise treatment with NVP-based antiretroviral regimens.
Nevirapine and other members of the non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) family of anti-HIV-1 drugs are essential components of antiretroviral treatment regimens. Unfortunately, drug resistance has become an important issue with respect to all therapeutic targets in HIV-1. This paper summarizes current knowledge about the mutations in the reverse transcriptase gene of HIV-1 that are responsible for drug resistance and the mechanisms whereby drug resistance develops.
Single-dose nevirapine (SD NVP) reduces intrapartum HIV-1 transmission, but nonnucleoside reverse transcription (NNRTI) resistance mutations can emerge. Population sequencing among 32 subtype C HIV-1-infected, SD NVP-exposed Zimbawean women demonstrated NNRTI resistance in 25/32 (78%) women: 23/30 (77%) at 2 weeks, 11/31 (35%) at 8 weeks, and 5/27 (19%) at 24 weeks. A total of 447 unique TA clones (median = 28 per time point), from four women with resistance at 8 weeks but wild-type virus by population sequence at 24 weeks, identified NNRTI mutations in a median of 76% (range: 55-96%) of individual clones at 2 weeks, 48% (range: 33-80%) at 8 weeks, and 5% (range: 0-15%) by 24 weeks. NNRTI mutations in breast milk clones at 2 and weeks from one woman varied significantly from plasma. Population sequencing underestimates the diversity of NNRTI resistance mutations within minority populations following SD NVP in subtype C HIV-1 viral RNA in plasma and breast milk.
This study aimed to assess the formation of nevirapine (NVP) co-amorphs systems (CAM) with different co-formers (lamivudine-3TC, citric acid-CAc, and urea) through combined screening techniques as computational and thermal studies, solubility studies; in addition to develop and characterize suitable NVP-CAM. NVP-CAM were obtained using the quench-cooling method, and characterized by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), X-ray diffractometry (XRD), Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), and polarized light microscopy (PLM), in addition to in vitro dissolution in pH 6.8. The screening results indicated intermolecular interactions occurring between NVP and 3TC; NVP and CAc, where shifts in the melting temperature of NVP were verified. The presence of CAc impacted the NVP equilibrium solubility, due to hydrogen bonds. DSC thermograms evidenced the reduction and shifting of the endothermic peaks of NVP in the presence of its co-formers, suggesting partial miscibility of the compounds. Amorphization was proven by XRD and PLM assays. In vitro dissolution study exhibited a significant increase in solubility and dissolution efficiency of NVP-CAM compared to free NVP. Combined use of screening studies was useful for the development of stable and amorphous NVP-CAM, with increased NVP solubility, making CAM promising systems for combined antiretroviral therapy.
The non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) efavirenz and nevirapine are chemically distinct, but both may cause cutaneous hypersensitivity and hepatotoxicity. We reviewed the literature to assess the evidence for cross-reactivity between nevirapine and efavirenz. All papers, abstracts, or presentations, regardless of study design, that made reference to the response of patients who were switched from one NNRTI to another as a result of an adverse drug reaction were included. Most of the studies were retrospective. Recurrent reactions occurred in 30 (12.6%) of 239 reported patients with rash who were switched from nevirapine to efavirenz, compared with eight (50%) of 16 patients switched from efavirenz to nevirapine. Hepatitis did not recur in either the 11 reported patients switched from nevirapine to efavirenz, or in the single reported patient who was switched from efavirenz to nevirapine. Substituting efavirenz for nevirapine following hepatotoxicity or cutaneous hypersensitivity appears to be reasonable, providing that the adverse reaction to nevirapine was not life-threatening. There is insufficient evidence to recommend substituting nevirapine for efavirenz following either hepatotoxicity or cutaneous hypersensitivity.
Nevirapine (NVP) is widely used as a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor of HIV-1, however, it is associated with severe skin and liver injury. The mechanisms of these adverse reactions are not yet clear, but the metabolic activation of NVP is thought to be related to the injury process. Until now, several metabolic activation pathways of NVP have been reported. In this study, in order to identify the reactive metabolite of NVP mainly responsible for CYP inhibition and liver injury, we synthesized five NVP analogs designed to avoid the proposed bioactivation pathway and evaluated their metabolic stabilities, CYP3A4 time-dependent inhibitory activities, and cytotoxicity. As a result, only a pyrimidine analog of NVP, which could avoid the formation of a reactive epoxide intermediate, did not inhibit CYP3A4. Outside of this compound, the other synthesized compounds, which could avoid the generation of a reactive quinone-methide intermediate, inhibited CYP3A4 equal to or stronger than NVP. The pyrimidine analog of NVP did not induce cytotoxicity in HepG2 and transchromosomic HepG2 cells, expressing major four CYP enzymes and CYP oxidoreductase. These results indicated that the epoxide intermediate of NVP might play an important role in NVP-induced liver injury.
A multifactor optimization technique is successfully applied to study the effect of simultaneously varying the system variables on feasibility of nevirapine analysis by packed column supercritical fluid chromatography (PC-SFC). The optimal conditions were determined with the aid of the response surface methodology using 3(3) factorial designs. The method is based on methanol-modified carbon dioxide as the mobile phase at flow rate of 3.0 ml/min with elution through a JASCO Finepak SIL-5, [C18 (5-micron, 25 cm x 4.6 mm, i.d.)] column using photodiode array detection. The method has been successfully used to analyze commercial solid dosage form to assess the chromatographic performance of SFC system. The present work briefs the thermodynamic applications of PC-SFC with an emphasis on the results of nevirapine. The foremost of such applications is the determination of solute diffusion coefficient in supercritical mobile phase by Taylor-Aris peak broadening technique.
Some known nevirapine solvates have been reported to undergo solvent exchange in aqueous media to form a stable hemihydrate. This study aimed to determine the effects of atmospheric moisture on said nevirapine solvates and to gain insight into which factors determine the end product of transformation. Solvates were prepared by solvent recrystallisation and stored, together with the anhydrous and hemihydrate forms, in a climate chamber at 40  degrees C and 75% RH for a period of 28 days. Samples were analyzed using DSC, TGA, FT-IR, PXRD and Karl Fischer titration. Some solvates were observed to undergo desolvation to the anhydrous form of nevirapine (Form I), whilst others converted to the hemihydrate. It was found that water miscibility of the guest solvent determined the stable form of nevirapine, anhydrous or hemihydrate, to which each solvate eventually transformed. Transformation to the hemihydrate only occurred if the guest solvent was sufficiently water soluble to allow water molecules to enter solvent channels and displace the original guest. Solvates with hydrophobic guests desolvated to the anhydrous form. We concluded that, in the absence of a guest, solvent channels are lost during transformation to the monoclinic crystal system and space group P21/c (Form I) so that water cannot enter after desolvation.
Prophylaxis with zidovudine and 3 doses of nevirapine (NVP) is recommended for infants born to HIV-1 infected untreated mothers to prevent HIV-1 mother-to-child transmission. However little is known about NVP pharmacokinetics in neonates, mostly in preterm infants. We performed therapeutic monitoring of NVP plasma concentrations in a 32-week preterm HIV-1 exposed infant born to an infected untreated mother. With the recommended regimen, an intense NVP exposure was observed, with NVP plasma levels exceeding the target concentration by up to 40 times, suggesting that when a laboratory assessment of NVP plasma concentrations is available, it may be useful to monitor and optimize drug exposure.
Seventy human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients receiving rifampicin and 70 HIV-infected patients not receiving rifampicin were enrolled to receive 400 mg of nevirapine-based highly active antiretroviral therapy per day. Mean plasma nevirapine levels at 8 and 12 weeks were lower in patients receiving rifampicin (P=.048). However, virological and immunological outcomes at 24 weeks were not different between the 2 groups (P>.05).
The dNN study evaluated the safety, efficacy and pharmacokinetic interactions of the combination of stavudine (2',3'-didehydro-2',3'-dideoxythymidine; D4T), nelfinavir and nevirapine in 25 HIV-infected subjects who received treatment for up to 29 weeks. This brief report presents the study design and preliminary data.
Remediation of the antiretroviral (ARV) drug, nevirapine (NVP) has attracted considerable scientific attention in recent years due to its frequent detection and persistence in aquatic environments and potential hazards to living organisms. Algae-based technologies have been emerging as an environmentally friendly option for the removal of pharmaceutical compounds, but their ARV drug removal potential has not been fully explored yet. This study aimed to explore the ecotoxicity and removal potential of NVP by two microalgal species, Coelastrella tenuitheca and Tetradesmus obliquus. Lower environmental concentrations (up to 200 ng L(-1)) of NVP enhanced the microalgal growth, and the highest dry cell weight of 941.27 mg L(-1) was obtained in T. obliquus at 50 ng L(-1) NVP concentration. Both microalgae showed varying removal efficiencies (19.53-74.56%) when exposed to NVP concentration levels of up to 4000 ng L(-1). At the late log phase (day 8), T. obliquus removed the highest percentage of NVP (74.56%), while C. tenuitheca removed 48% at an initial NVP concentration of 50 ng L(-1). Photosynthetic efficiency (Fv/Fm and rETR) of the two microalgal species, however, was not affected by environmental concentrations of NVP (up to 4000 ng L(-1)) at the mid log phase of growth. SEM analysis demonstrated that both algal species produced distinct ridges on their cell surfaces after NVP uptake. In the ecotoxicity study, the calculated IC(50) values of NVP (0-100 mg L(-1)) after 96 h of exposure were 23.45 mg L(-1) (C. tenuitheca) and 18.20 mg L(-1) (T. obliquus). The findings of the present study may contribute to a better understanding of the environmental hazards associated with NVP and the efficacy of microalgae in removing this pharmaceutical from aquatic environments.
An unknown impurity (degradation product) present at a level below 0.1% in the initial sample was increased to 0.25% in 50 degrees C 3 M stability samples of lamivudine, zidovudine and nevirapine tablets for oral suspension, as detected by gradient reverse phase HPLC. This degradation product was isolated using reverse phase preparative HPLC. Based on the spectral data, the structure of this degradation product is characterized as 1-[5-hydroxymethyl-4-(5-methyl-2,3-dihydro-[1,2,3]triazole-1-yl)-tetrahydrofuran-2-yl]-5-methyl-1 H-pyrimidine-2,4-(1H,3H)dione. Structural elucidation of this degradation product was carried out using MS, 1H NMR, 13C NMR, DEPT and IR spectral data. The formation of this impurity and its mechanism are discussed.
Fosamprenavir (FPV) with and without ritonavir (RTV) was added to the antiretroviral regimens of human immunodeficiency virus-infected subjects receiving nevirapine (NVP) to evaluate this drug interaction. Significant reductions in plasma amprenavir exposure (25 to 35%) were observed following coadministration of 1,400 mg of FPV twice a day (BID) and 200 mg of NVP BID. A regimen of 700 mg of FPV BID plus 100 mg of RTV BID may be coadministered with NVP without dose adjustment.
INTRODUCTION: Since 2002, the WHO has recommended either nevirapine (NVP) or efavirenz (EFV) as part of first-line antiretroviral therapy. These two drugs are known to have differing toxicity profiles, but the risk of these toxicities overall is not well established. METHODS: We systematically reviewed adverse events among treatment-naive HIV-positive adults and children receiving either NVP or EFV as part of first-line antiretroviral therapy. The primary outcome was drug discontinuation as a result of any adverse event; specific toxicities were evaluated as secondary outcomes. Point estimates and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) were calculated and proportions and odds ratios (ORs) pooled using fixed-effects meta-analysis. RESULTS: We reviewed data on 26,446 adults and 3975 children from eight randomized trials and 26 prospective cohorts. Overall, adults on NVP were more than two times more likely to discontinue treatment due to any adverse event compared to patients on EFV (OR 2.2, 95% CI 1.9-2.6). Severe hepatotoxicity (OR 3.3, 95% CI 2.5-4.2), severe skin toxicity (OR 3.9, 95% CI 2.5-5.4), and severe hypersensitivity reactions (OR 2.4, 95% CI 1.9-2.9) were more likely to occur among patients on NVP. Patients receiving EFV were more likely to experience severe central nervous system events (OR 3.4, 95% CI 2.1-5.4). Similar associations were seen in children. DISCUSSION: Compared to NVP, EFV is associated with a lower frequency of severe adverse events, in particular treatment discontinuations. This finding supports a move toward EFV-based therapy as the preferred first-line treatment regimen for HIV treatment within a public health approach.
We report a case in which an HIV-positive man developed general malaise, skin rash and biochemical hepatitis within days of starting a nevirapine-based antiretroviral treatment regimen. At the same time, his syphilis serology proved positive. We discuss the diagnostic dilemma: was this a nevirapine hypersensitivity reaction, secondary syphilis or both?
BACKGROUND: A single intrapartum dose of nevirapine for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) leads to the selection of resistance mutations. Whether there are clinically significant consequences in mothers who are subsequently treated with a nevirapine-containing regimen is unknown. METHODS: We randomly assigned 1844 women in Thailand who received zidovudine during the third trimester of pregnancy to receive intrapartum nevirapine or placebo. In the postpartum period, 269 of the women with a CD4 count below 250 cells per cubic millimeter began a nevirapine-containing antiretroviral regimen. Plasma samples were obtained 10 days post partum and analyzed for resistance mutations. Plasma HIV type 1 (HIV-1) RNA was measured before the initiation of therapy and three and six months thereafter. RESULTS: After six months of therapy, the HIV-1 RNA level was less than 50 copies per milliliter in 49 percent of the women who had received intrapartum nevirapine, as compared with 68 percent of the women who had not received intrapartum nevirapine (P=0.03). Resistance mutations to nonnucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors were detectable in blood samples obtained 10 days post partum from 32 percent of the women who had received intrapartum nevirapine; the most frequent mutations were K103N, G190A, and Y181C. Among the women who had received intrapartum nevirapine, viral suppression was achieved at six months in 38 percent of those with resistance mutations and 52 percent of those without resistance mutations (P=0.08). An HIV-1 RNA level at or above the median of 4.53 log10 copies per milliliter before therapy and intrapartum exposure to nevirapine were independently associated with virologic failure. After six months of therapy, there was no significant difference between groups in the CD4 count (P=0.65). CONCLUSIONS: Women who received intrapartum nevirapine were less likely to have virologic suppression after six months of postpartum treatment with a nevirapine-containing regimen. Our data suggest the need for strategies to maximize the benefits of both antiretroviral prophylaxis against mother-to-child transmission of HIV and antiretroviral therapy for mothers.
