The Preiss-Handler pathway, which salvages nicotinate (NA) for NAD synthesis, is an indispensable biochemical pathway in land plants. Various NA conjugations (mainly methylation and glycosylation) have been detected and have long been proposed for NA detoxification in plants. Previously, we demonstrated that NA O-glucosylation functions as a mobilizable storage form for NAD biosynthesis in the Brassicaceae. However, little is known about the functions of other NA conjugations in plants. In this study, we first found that N-methylnicotinate is a ubiquitous NA conjugation in land plants. Furthermore, we functionally identified a novel methyltransferase (At3g53140; NANMT), which is mainly responsible for N-methylnicotinate formation, from Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). We also established that trigonelline is a detoxification form of endogenous NA in plants. Combined phylogenetic analysis and enzymatic assays revealed that NA N-methylation activity was likely derived from the duplication and subfunctionalization of an ancestral caffeic acid O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene in the course of land plant evolution. COMT enzymes, which function in S-lignin biosynthesis, also have weak NANMT activity. Our data suggest that NA detoxification conferred by NANMT and COMT might have facilitated the retention of the Preiss-Handler pathway in land plants.
Hexyl nicotinate in a lotion formulation was applied topically to the skin of 10 healthy volunteers with clinically normal skin. Erythematous responses were assessed visually and skin blood flow determined by means of a laser Doppler flow meter which measures the blood cell flux (Pf2 Perimed, Sweden). Mean erythematous responses and increased blood cell flux were dose-related but in several subjects increases in blood flow occurred in the presence of barely detectable erythematous responses. In some subjects, hexyl nicotinate may be an effective cutaneous vasodilator even in the presence of minimal erythema.
Salvage of nicotinate riboside for NAD synthesis was investigated in mungbean seedlings. Nicotinate riboside kinase activity was detected in extracts from cotyledons. Exogenously supplied [carboxyl-(14)C]nicotinate riboside was readily converted into pyridine nucleotides in cotyledons of mungbean seedlings. This conversion was also found in embryonic axes, but the rate was lower than in cotyledons. These results suggest that, in addition to the seven-component pyridine nucleotide cycle (PNC VII), an eight-component cycle (PNC VIII) involving nicotinate riboside kinase operates in plants.
Bacterial nicotinate mononucleotide adenylyltransferase encoded by the essential gene nadD plays a central role in the synthesis of the redox cofactor NAD(+). The NadD enzyme is conserved in the majority of bacterial species and has been recognized as a novel target for developing new and potentially broad-spectrum antibacterial therapeutics. Here we report the crystal structures of Bacillus anthracis NadD in complex with three NadD inhibitors, including two analogues synthesized in the present study. These structures revealed a common binding site shared by different classes of NadD inhibitors and explored the chemical environment surrounding this site. The structural data obtained here also showed that the subtle changes in ligand structure can lead to significant changes in the binding mode, information that will be useful for future structure-based optimization and design of high affinity inhibitors.
The emergence of multidrug-resistant pathogens necessitates the search for new antibiotics acting on previously unexplored targets. Nicotinate mononucleotide adenylyltransferase of the NadD family, an essential enzyme of NAD biosynthesis in most bacteria, was selected as a target for structure-based inhibitor development. Using iterative in silico and in vitro screens, we identified small molecule compounds that efficiently inhibited target enzymes from Escherichia coli (ecNadD) and Bacillus anthracis (baNadD) but had no effect on functionally equivalent human enzymes. On-target antibacterial activity was demonstrated for some of the selected inhibitors. A 3D structure of baNadD was solved in complex with one of these inhibitors (3_02), providing mechanistic insights and guidelines for further improvement. Most importantly, the results of this study help validate NadD as a target for the development of antibacterial agents with potential broad-spectrum activity.
Topical application of a sufficiently concentrated aqueous solution of methyl nicotinate elicits within minutes an erythematous, vasodilatory response in humans. In this study the radial increase of the erythematous area visible in the skin has been followed as a function of solution application time and methyl nicotinate concentration. Because of the nature of the physiological response, the observations are interpreted in terms of the dermal movement of the drug. The rate of radial spread was much more rapid than can be accounted for in terms of simple diffusion, and a mechanism involving transport by the blood flowing in the dermal vasculature is proposed.
In Aspergillus nidulans a regulon including 11 hxn genes (hxnS, T, R, P, Y, Z, X, W, V, M and N) is inducible by a nicotinate metabolic derivative, repressible by ammonium and under stringent control of the nitrogen-state-sensitive GATA factor AreA and the specific transcription factor HxnR. This is the first report in a eukaryote of the genomic organization of a possibly complete pathway of nicotinate utilization. In A. nidulans the regulon is organized in three distinct clusters, this organization is variable in the Ascomycota. In some Pezizomycotina species all 11 genes map in a single cluster; in others they map in two clusters. This variable organization sheds light on cluster evolution. Instances of gene duplication followed by or simultaneous with integration in the cluster, partial or total cluster loss, and horizontal gene transfer of several genes (including an example of whole cluster re-acquisition in Aspergillus of section Flavi) were detected, together with the incorporation in some clusters of genes not found in the A. nidulans co-regulated regulon, which underlie both the plasticity and the reticulate character of metabolic cluster evolution. This study provides a comprehensive phylogeny of six members of the cluster across representatives of all Ascomycota classes.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate whether local application of methyl nicotinate solution can change the content and proportion of blood cells in peripheral blood samples and to determine whether this treatment is a safe and reliable method for improving peripheral blood collection. METHODS: Routine blood analysis and flow cytometry were used to analyze the contents and proportions of blood cells and T lymphocyte subsets in peripheral blood samples. Experimental blood specimens were collected from earlobes treated with different concentrations of methyl nicotinate solution, and the control group consisted of blood specimens collected from untreated earlobes. RESULTS: The blood flow in the earlobe was significantly increased after methyl nicotinate solution stimulation, especially when the methyl nicotinate solution concentration was greater than 10-4 mol/L. There were no significant changes in the proportions of white blood cells, red blood cells, platelets, neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, monocytes, or lymphocytes in the peripheral blood obtained from earlobes treated with methyl nicotinate solution. The proportion of T lymphocytes increased in the experimental group, but this difference was not significant. CONCLUSION: Local application of methyl nicotinate solution is a feasible method for improving peripheral blood collection, especially for patients with venous blood collection phobia or an inability to provide venous blood samples.
With an aim to discover novel chitosan derivatives with significant activities against crop-threatening fungi, (1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl nicotinate chitosan (TAMNCS) was prepared via azide-alkyne click reaction. Its structure was characterized by FT-IR, (1)H NMR, elemental analysis, DSC, and SEM. In vitro antifungal properties of TAMNCS against Rhizoctonia solani Kuhn (R. solani), Stemphylium solani weber (S. solani), and Alternaria porri (A. porri) were studied at the concentrations ranged from 0.25 mg/mL to 1.0 mg/mL. Experiments conducted displayed the derivative had obviously enhanced antifungal activity after chemical modification compared with original chitosan. Moreover, it was shown that TAMNCS can 94.2% inhibit growth of A. porri at 1.0 mg/mL, while dose at which the fungicide triadimefon had lower inhibitory index (62.2%). The primary antifungal results described here indicate this derivative may be a promising candidate as an antifungal agent.
Plant-derived insecticide-neonicotinoid insecticides (NIs) played a crucial role in the development of agriculture and food industry in recent years. Nevertheless, synthesis of these nitrogen-containing heterocyclic compounds with an effective and greener routing remains challenging especially to the notion raise of "green chemistry" and "atom economy". While bio-catalyzed methods mediated by nicotinate dehydrogenase (NDHase) then provide an alternative. The current review mainly focuses on the introduction of sources, components, structure, catalytic mechanism and applications of NDHase. Specifically, NDHase is known as nicotinic acid hydroxylase and the sources principally derived from phylum Proteobacteria. In addition, NDHase requires the participation of the electron respiratory chain system on the cell membrane. And the most important components of the electron respiratory chain are hydrogen carrier, which is mainly composed of iron-sulfur proteins (Fe-S), flavin dehydrogenase (FAD), molybdenum binding protein and cytochromes. Heterologous expression studies were hampered by the plasmid and host with high efficiency and currently only Pseudomonas entomophila L48 as well as Comamonas testosterone was successfully utilized for the expression of NDHase. Furthermore, it is speculated that the conjugate and inductive effects of the substituent group at position 3 of the substrate pyridine ring exerts a critical role in the hydroxylation reactions at position 6 concerning about the substrate molecular recognition mechanism. Finally, applications of NDHase are addressed in terms of pesticide industry and wastewater treatment. On conclusion, this critical review would not only deepen our understanding of the theory about NDHase, but also provides the guideline for future investigation of NDHase.
The basal temperature of the hands has been measured by quantitative thermography in a group of normal controls and rheumatoid patients exhibiting Raynaud's phenomenon. The thermographic index for both the dorsum of the hand and the fingers was significantly lower in the patients with Raynaud's. Oral treatment with inositol nicotinate (Hexopal) was followed by an initial rise in the thermographic index in both areas. After the initial increase the temperature fell again but then rose after two months treatment. At nine months two subjects on continuous therapy had higher indices than the four who had discontinued therapy. It is suggested that long-term treatment with nicotinate acid derivatives may produce improvement in the peripheral circulation by a different mechanism than the transient effect detected by short-term studies.
Patients in health-care settings develop nosocomial infections due to prolonged hospital stay. The Gram negative Klebsiella pneumoniae (K. pneumoniae), is a bacterial pathogen responsible for most nosocomial infections and are resistant to most current antibiotics. Hence, there is need for identification and validation of potential protein targets for design of new generation antibiotics. One of such targets is nicotinate nucleotide adenylyltransferase, an enzyme responsible for redox metabolism. This study focuses on novel expression, purification, and biophysical characterization of NNAT from K. pneumoniae. KpNNAT was over-expressed in T7 express Escherichia coli using the pGEX-4 T-1 expressions system and purified to > 98% homogeneity (~ 20 mg KpNNAT/g of the wet cell) using a combination of glutathione-agarose and immobilized Ni(2+) affinity chromatography. KpNNAT indirectly showed "pseudo-specific activity" of 0.30 mumol/min/mg towards beta-nicotinate mononucleotide and ATP using alcohol dehydrogenase as a secondary enzyme (in the presence of ethanol). Far-UV circular dichroism showed a ~ 38% predominantly alpha-helical and 16% beta-strand secondary structural content. The binding of ATP to KpNNAT is entropically-driven with an overall ∆G degrees  of ‒23.8 kJ/mol and dissociation constant of 69.1 microM. Data from this study suggest that KpNNAT can be expressed in E. coli, purified to homogeneity to yield high quantities of active recombinant enzyme for downstream biophysical studies such as X-ray crystallography.
BACKGROUND: Methyl nicotinate (MN) induces a local cutaneous erythema in the skin and may be valuable as a local provocation in the assessment of microcirculation and skin viability. The mechanisms through which MN mediates its vascular effect are not fully known. The aim of this study was to characterize the vasodilatory effects of topically applied MN and to study the involvement of nitric oxide (NO), local sensory nerves, and prostaglandin-mediated pathways. METHODS: MN was applied on the skin of healthy subjects in which NO-mediated (L-NMMA), nerve-mediated (lidocaine/prilocaine), and cyclooxygenase-mediated (NSAID) pathways were selectively inhibited. Microvascular responses in the skin were measured using laser speckle contrast imaging (LSCI). RESULTS: NSAID reduced the MN-induced perfusion increase with 82% (P < .01), whereas lidocaine/prilocaine reduced it with 32% (P < .01). L-NMMA did not affect the microvascular response to MN. CONCLUSION: The prostaglandin pathway and local sensory nerves are involved in the vasodilatory actions of MN in the skin.
A rigid nicotinate-modified lanthanide-substituted selenotungstate [H(2)N(CH(3))(2)](6)Na(3)H[La(4)SeW(8)(H(2)O)(16)(nica)(2)O(28)][SeW(9)O(33)](2).32H(2)O (1, Hnica = nicotinic acid) was synthesized and consists of two trivacant Keggin [B-alpha-SeW(9)O(33)](8-) fragments and one unusual [SeW(4)O(18)](8-) fragment bridged by a heterometallic [La(4)W(4)(H(2)O)(16)(nica)(2)O(28)](18-) cluster. In the heterometallic cluster, two carboxyl O atoms in two nicotinate ligands directly coordinate with two W atoms in a stable C-O-W-O-W-O six-membered ring fashion. According to its catalase-like activity, 1 was utilized to catalyze the oxidation of 3,3',5,5'-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) by H(2)O(2) to produce blue oxidized TMB (ox-TMB), which can be used to establish a colorimetric sensing method for the detection of ascorbic acid. This work not only provides a promising platform for detecting H(2)O(2) and ascorbic acid but also expands the application potential of polyoxometalate-based materials in biological and clinical analyses.
