INTRODUCTION: Nimodipine is a calcium channel blocker that has been used to treat hypertension and vasospasm. Emerging evidence in the literature suggests that it is neuroprotective by reducing cellular apoptosis after neuronal injury and promoting axonal sprouting at the nodes of Ranvier. OBJECTIVES: To conduct a systematic review of the usage of nimodipine in cranial nerve injury and to perform a meta-analysis to estimate the efficacy of nimodipine on functional recovery of the injured cranial nerves. METHODS: Literature search was performed in eight databases using preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Human studies that used nimodipine as a monotherapy for treating cranial nerve injury were included for review. Cranial nerve function recovery was the primary outcome measure. RESULTS: 672 records were screened and 58 full texts in English were assessed. Nine studies were included in the final review. 5 of these, including 110 participants who received nimodipine for either recurrent laryngeal nerve or facial nerve injury and 556 controls, were used for meta-analysis. Nimodipine significantly increased the odds of vocal fold motion recovery (odds ratio [OR] 13.73, 95% confidence interval [CI] 6.21, 30.38, P < .01), and the odds of facial motion recovery (OR 2.78, 95% CI 1.20, 6.44, P = .02). Overall, nimodipine-treated patients had significantly higher odds of recovering vocal fold or facial motion compared with controls (OR 6.09, 95% CI 3.41, 10.87, P < .01). CONCLUSION: Existing evidence supports the positive effect of nimodipine on vocal fold and facial motion recovery after injury. Future research should focus on randomized clinical trials comparing recovery rates between nimodipine- and placebo-treated groups. Laryngoscope, 129:943-951, 2019.
OBJECTIVE: Nimodipine has emerged as a promising strategy for protection of cranial nerves following vestibular schwannoma (VS) resections. Our goal was to conduct a comprehensive analysis of clinical studies to determine the therapeutic efficacy of nimodipine in improving facial nerve and cochlear nerve function. DATABASE REVIEWED: We searched PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane Clinical Trial Registry, Clinicaltrials.gov, World Health Organization's International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, and EU Clinical Trials Registry to identify clinical studies up to May 11, 2020. METHODS: We included studies evaluating perioperative administration of nimodipine as a strategy to prevent or treat facial nerve or cochlear nerve dysfunction following VS resections. Primary outcomes included preservation or recovery of House-Brackman scale for facial nerve function and Hearing and Equilibrium Guidelines for cochlear nerve function at the latest follow-up visit. Secondary outcomes included adverse events and administration strategies of nimodipine. RESULTS: Nine studies (603 patients) met inclusion, of which seven studies (559 patients) were included in the quantitative analysis. Overall, nimodipine significantly increased the odds of cranial nerve recovery compared with controls (odds ratio [OR] 2.87, 95% confidence intervals [CI] [2.08, 3.95]; I2 = 0%). Subgroup analysis demonstrated that nimodipine was only effective for cochlear nerve preservation (OR 2.78, 95% CI [1.74, 4.45]; I2 = 0%), but not for facial nerve function (OR 4.54, 95% CI [0.25, 82.42]; I2 = 33%). CONCLUSION: Although there is evidence supporting the perioperative role of nimodipine for VS resections, more studies are warranted to help clarify the effects of nimodipine therapy on cranial nerve preservation.
Nimodipine is a dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonist that blocks the flux of extracellular calcium through L-type, voltage-gated calcium channels. While nimodipine is FDAapproved for the prevention and treatment of neurological deficits in patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH), it affects myriad cell types throughout the body, and thus, likely has more complex mechanisms of action than simple inhibition of cerebral vasoconstriction. Newer understanding of the pathophysiology of delayed ischemic injury after a variety of acute neurologic injuries including aSAH, traumatic brain injury (TBI) and ischemic stroke, coupled with advances in the drug delivery method for nimodipine, have reignited interest in refining its potential therapeutic use. In this context, this review seeks to establish a firm understanding of current data on nimodipine's role in the mechanisms of delayed injury in aSAH, TBI, and ischemic stroke, and assess the extensive clinical data evaluating its use in these conditions. In addition, we will review pivotal trials using locally administered, sustained release nimodipine and discuss why such an approach has evaded demonstration of efficacy, while seemingly having the potential to significantly improve clinical care.
BACKGROUND: No approved treatment is available for patients with vascular cognitive impairment (VCI) due to cerebral small vessel disease (SVD). OBJECTIVE: The CONIVaD (Choline Alphoscerate and Nimodipine in Vascular Dementia) study aimed to investigate the feasibility, efficacy, and safety of a combined treatment with choline alphoscerate and nimodipine in patients with SVD and mild-to-moderate cognitive impairment. METHODS: Within this pilot, single-center (university hospital), double-blinded, randomized clinical trial, patients were randomized to two arms: 1-year treatment with nimodipine 30 mg three times a day (TID) plus choline alphoscerate 600 mg twice a day (BID) (arm 1) or nimodipine 30 mg TID plus placebo BID (arm 2). Patients underwent an evaluation at baseline and after 12 months. Cognitive decline, defined as a >/= 2-point loss on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment, was the primary endpoint. Functional, quality of life, other cognitive measures, and safety were secondary endpoints. Treatment adherence was measured by the count of medicine bottles returned by patients. RESULTS: Sixty-two patients were randomized (31 each arm). Fourteen patients (22%) dropped out for reasons including consent withdrawal (n = 9), adverse reactions (n = 4), and stroke (n = 1). Forty-eight patients (mean +/- SD age 75.1 +/- 6.8 years), well balanced between arms, completed the study. Regarding adherence, of the prescribed total drug dose, > 75% was taken by 96% of patients for choline alphoscerate, 87.5% for placebo, and 15% for nimodipine. No statistically significant differences were found between the treatment groups for the primary cognitive outcome, nor for the secondary outcomes. Eight patients had non-serious adverse reactions; five presented adverse events. CONCLUSION: Patients' adherence to treatment was low. With this limitation, the combined choline alphoscerate-nimodipine treatment showed no significant effect in our cohort of VCI patients with SVD. The safety profile was good overall. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical Trial NCT03228498. Registered 25 July 2017.
A single oral dose of tablets or capsules of 239 mumol nimodipine was given to 8 healthy volunteers of Han nationality in a randomized crossover study. Plasma levels were determined with HPLC method. The plasma concentration-time curve fitted to a first order absorption, 1-compartment open model, and the T1/2K was around 2 h. Although the capsules could reach peak level faster, the bioavailability was not significantly different from that of the tablets.
BACKGROUND: Oral nimodipine is an established prophylactic agent for cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). In highly selected cases, intra-arterial (IA) or intravenous (IV) application of nimodipine may be considered; however, the optimum dosage and modality of application remain a matter of debate. The purpose of this investigation is analysis of nimodipine concentration in serum, cerebrospinal fluid, and cerebral microdialysate in the context of currently effective dose and route of application (oral, IA, IV). METHODS: We prospectively collected 156 samples from 37 patients treated for aneurysmal SAH from May 2014 to July 2015. Treatment groups were stratified according to modality of application and low-dose or high-dose treatment. At time of sampling, current dose and modality of application effectively sustained cerebral perfusion as documented by common diagnostics. Samples were analyzed for nimodipine concentration via high-performance liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. RESULTS: In most cases (94.3%), nimodipine remained below the limit of quantification (0.5 ng/mL) within the brain (microdialysis, cerebrospinal fluid), even during targeted, local application (IA nimodipine). The median serum concentration for all treatment groups was 17.3 ng/mL. Modality of application (oral, IA, IV) was not associated with significant differences in serum concentrations (P = 0.712), even after stratification for dosage (P = 0.371), implying a comparable systemic distribution, if not efficacy. CONCLUSIONS: Nimodipine does not accumulate sufficiently within the target organ for treatment monitoring. Comparable systemic concentrations can be observed irrespective of application modality and dosing. Future studies will clarify the role of efficacy-driven treatment algorithms, in which lowest dose and least invasive mode of application still effective should be identified.
Currently, a research hotspot in amorphous active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) is to understand the key factors that dominate recrystallization and to develop effective methods for stabilizing amorphous forms. Consequently, we investigated the influence of the global molecular mobility and structural properties on the crystallization tendency of three 1,4-dihydropyridine derivatives (nifedipine, nisoldipine, and nimodipine) in their supercooled states using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and broadband dielectric spectroscopy (BDS) techniques. The BDS is also employed to monitor the isothermal crystallization kinetics of supercooled nifedipine and nimodipine at T = 333 K under ambient pressure. As a result, we found that nimodipine exhibits much slower crystallization in comparison to nifedipine. However, nimodipine crystallizes much faster when as little as 10 MPa of pressure is exerted on sample. Such compression-induced crystallization of nimodipine as well as the inherent instability of nifedipine can be solved effectively by preparing coamorphous nifedipine/nimodipine combinations. Interestingly, the high physical stability of nifedipine/nimodipine mixtures is achieved despite the fact that the nimodipine acts as a plasticizer.
The aim of the present study was to manufacture new orally disintegrating tablets containing nimodipine-hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin and nimodipine-methyl-beta-cyclodextrin inclusion complexes. For obtaining a better quality of the manufactured tablets, three methods of the preparation of inclusion complexes, in a 1:1 molar ratio, were used comparatively; namely, a solid-state kneading method and two liquid state coprecipitation and lyophilization techniques. The physical and chemical properties of the obtained inclusion complexes, as well as their physical mixtures, were investigated using Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction analyses, and differential scanning calorimetry. The results showed that the lyophilization method can be successfully used for a better complexation. Finally, the formulation and precompression studies for tablets for oral dispersion, containing Nim-HP-beta-CD and Nim-Me-beta-CD inclusion complexes, were successfully assessed.
Nimodipine is a lipophilic dihydropyridine calcium antagonist which is used to reduce the incidence and severity of delayed cerebral ischaemia in patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage. This article reviews its mechanism of action, pharmacology and indications for use.
BACKGROUND: Current guidelines recommend the administration of nimodipine for the prevention of delayed cerebral ischemia (DCI) after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH). However, nimodipine can lead to significant drops in mean arterial pressure and cerebral perfusion pressure. Catecholamines are then used to maintain them while nimodipine is reduced and/or held. There is no evidence that nimodipine retains its neuroprotective effect at lower doses. We aimed to investigate the role of nimodipine interruption in the setting of aSAH and its possible impact on the incidence of DCI. METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis in patients with aSAH admitted to our center from January 2012 to October 2015. Nimodipine prophylaxis duration and dosage and the incidence of DCI were recorded. Bivariate correlation with Spearman's rho (rho) and ordinal regression analyses were performed. RESULTS: A total of 170 patients were included in the study. Of these, 165 (97.1%) received nimodipine prophylaxis starting on day 0. Nimodipine was interrupted in 85 of 165 (51.5%), whereas dose was reduced in 47 of 165 (28.5%); full dose was received by only 33 of 165 (20%). DCI was observed in 85 of 170 (50%). Nimodipine interruption correlated in a statistically significant way with a greater incidence of DCI (rho = 0.431, P < 0.001); receiving full doses of nimodipine showed a statistically significant inverse correlation to DCI (rho = -0.273, P < 0.001). Ordinal regression analysis revealed nimodipine interruption as a statistically significant independent predictor of DCI (odds ratio 0.194; 95% confidence interval 0.079-0.474, P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis reveals a greater incidence of DCI in patients with aSAH when nimodipine is interrupted.
PURPOSE: To quantitatively assess the dynamic changes of Lactate in lumbar discs under different physiological conditions using MRS and T2r. METHODS: In step1, MRS and T2r sequences were standardized in 10 volunteers. Step2, analysed effects of high cellular demand. 66 discs of 20 volunteers with no back pain were evaluated pre-exercise (EX-0), immediately after targeted short-time low back exercises (EX-1) and 60 min after (EX-2). In Step 3, to study effects of high glucose and oxygen concentration, 50 lumbar discs in 10 volunteers were analysed before (D0) and after 10 days intake of the calcium channel blocker, nimodipine (D1). RESULTS: Lactate showed a distinctly different response to exercise in that Grade 1 discs with a significant decrease in EX-1 and a trend for normalization in Ex-2. In contrast, Pfirrmann grade 2 and 3 and discs above 40 years showed a higher lactate relative to proteoglycan in EX-0, an increase in lactate EX-1 and mild dip in Ex-2. Similarly, following nimodipine, grade 1 discs showed an increase in lactate which was absent in grade 2 and 3 discs. In contrast, exercise and Nimodipine had no significant change in T2r values and MRS spectrum of proteoglycan, N-acetyl aspartate, carbohydrate, choline, creatine, and glutathione across age groups and Pfirrmann grades. CONCLUSION: MRS documented changes in lactate response to cellular demand which suggested a 'Lactate Symbiotic metabolic Pathway'. The differences in lactate response preceded changes in Proteoglycan/hydration and thus could be a dynamic radiological biomarker of early degeneration.
BACKGROUND: Cerebral infarction frequently leads to mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Prompt management of MCI can prevent vascular dementia and improve patient outcome. This single center randomized controlled trial aims to investigate the efficacy and safety of acupuncture and nimodipine to treat post-cerebral infarction MCI. METHODS: A total of 126 Chinese patients with post-cerebral infarction MCI recruited from the First Teaching Hospital of Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine between April 2013 and June 2014 were randomized at 1:1: 1 ratio into nimodipine alone (30 mg/time and 3 times daily), acupuncture alone (30 min/time, 6 times/week), and nimodipine + acupuncture groups. The treatments were 3 months. Cognitive function was evaluated using Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scale at enrollment interview, at the end of 3-month therapy, and at the post-treatment 3-month follow-up. RESULTS: The per-protocol set included 39, 40, and 40 patients from nimodipine alone, acupuncture alone, and the combination group, respectively, was analyzed. Intra-group comparison revealed that MoCA score at the follow-up improved significantly by 15.8 +/- 10.9, 20.9 +/- 13.8 %, and 30.2 +/- 19.7 % compared with the baseline MoCA for nimodipine alone, acupuncture alone, and the combination group, respectively. Inter-group comparison demonstrated that the combination therapy improved MoCA score (5.5 +/- 2.2) at significantly higher extent than nimodipine alone (3.1 +/- 1.8) and acupuncture alone (4.3 +/- 2.3) at the follow-up (All P < 0.05), and significantly higher proportion of patients in acupuncture alone group (80 %) and the combination therapy group (90 %) than in nimodipine alone group (56.4 %) showed >/=12 % MoCA score improvement compared with the baseline MoCA (All P < 0.05). No adverse event was reported during the study. CONCLUSION: Acupuncture may be used as an additional therapy to conventional pharmacological treatment to further improve the clinical outcomes of patients with post-cerebral infarction MCI. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The study was registered at the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry ( http://www.chictr.org.cn/ , Unique Identifier: ChiCTR-IOR-15007366 ). The date of registration is November 4, 2015.
Amorphous solid dispersion (ASD) is one of the most versatile supersaturating drug delivery systems to improve the dissolution rate and oral bioavailability of poorly water-soluble drugs. PVP based ASD formulation of nimodipine (NMD) has been marketed and effectively used in clinic for nearly 30 years, yet the mechanism by which PVP maintains the supersaturation and subsequently improves the bioavailability of NMD was rarely investigated. In this research, we first studied the molecular interactions between NMD and PVP by solution NMR, using CDCl(3) as the solvent, and the drug-polymer Flory-Huggins interaction parameter. No strong specific interaction between PVP and NMD was detected in the nonaqueous state. However, we observed that aqueous supersaturation of NMD could be significantly maintained by PVP, presumably due to the hydrophobic interactions between the hydrophobic moieties of PVP and NMD in aqueous medium. This hypothesis was supported by dynamic light scattering (DLS) and supersaturation experiments in the presence of different surfactants. DLS revealed the formation of NMD/PVP aggregates when NMD was supersaturated, suggesting the formation of hydrophobic interactions between the drug and polymer. The addition of surfactants, sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) or sodium taurocholate (NaTC), into PVP maintained that NMD supersaturation demonstrated different effects: SLS could only improve NMD supersaturation with concentration above its critical aggregation concentration (CAC) value while not with lower concentration. Nevertheless, NaTC could prolong NMD supersaturation independent of concentration, with lower concentration outperformed higher concentration. We attribute these observations to PVP-surfactant interactions and the formation of PVP/surfactant complexes. In summary, despite the lack of specific interactions in the nonaqueous state, NMD aqueous supersaturation in the presence of PVP was attained by hydrophobic interactions between the hydrophobic moieties of NMD and PVP. This hydrophobic interaction could be disrupted by surfactants, which interact with PVP competitively, thus hindering the capability of PVP to maintain NMD supersaturation. Therefore, caution is needed when evaluating such ASDs in vitro and in vivo when various surfactants are present either in the formulation or in the surrounding medium.
