We evaluated the benefits of prolonging norfloxacin therapy from 12 to 24 weeks for complicated urinary tract infection in a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study. During the second 12 weeks, norfloxacin was superior to placebo (P less than 0.05) in suppressing bacteriuria. Adverse effects were common but mostly confined to the initial 12 weeks.
Straw incorporation into reclaimed soils has been demonstrated to increase soil nutrients and has the potential to efficiently increase crop production. However, which incorporation mode is more helpful in the control of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) remains unknown. In this study, we systematically compared the occurrence of antibiotic resistome in norfloxacin contaminated soils amended with rice straw (RS) and the transformation products, biochar (RSB) and ash (RSA). RS significantly promoted the degradation of norfloxacin (0.0648 d(-1), 3 times faster than control), whereas RSB had little effect and RSA hindered the degradation. Based on metagenomic analysis, RS and RSB significantly reduced the ARGs relative abundance (0.1421 and 0.1991 compared to 0.2540 in control) at the end of soil incubation. Adonis test indicated that all of amendment treatments significantly affect the microbial communities in soils, whereas only RS and RSB significantly affect the variation of antibiotic resistome. Procrustes analysis confirmed the association of microbial communities and ARGs. Network analysis further revealed that the reduction in Actinobacteria was the main reason for the general decrease of ARGs relative abundance during soil incorporation, whereas Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes were responsible for temporary promotion of ARGs in RS and RSB at the early stage. Finally, scientifically setting up the usage of rice straw and optimizing the preparation process of biochar are suggested for the synchronous control of the risk of antibiotics and ARGs during soil incorporation.
In this study, magnetic coconut shell biochar loaded with spherical Fe(3)O(4) and gamma-Fe(2)O(3) particles was successfully synthesized using a chemical coprecipitation method. The magnetic biochar exhibited a good magnetic separability and environmental security. The maximum sulfadiazine (SDZ) and norfloxacin (NOR) removal efficiencies were 94.8% and 92.3% at pH 4 and 25  degrees C with adsorbent dosage of 2.5 g/L, respectively. When antibiotic concentrations ranged from 5 to 50 mg/L, the theoretical maximum adsorption capacities of SDZ and NOR were 16.7 mg/g and 25.8 mg/g, respectively. The Langmuir isotherm and pseudo-second-order kinetic models could better describe the adsorption process of both antibiotics, implying the monolayer chemical adsorption. The thermodynamic analysis indicated that the adsorption process was spontaneous and endothermic. The ionic strength had no significant effect on the adsorption behavior of either antibiotic. Combined with BET, FTIR, and XPS results, the dominant mechanisms for SDZ and NOR adsorption were pore filling, pi-pi electron-donor-acceptor interaction, hydrogen bonds and surface complexation. Moreover, Lewis acid-base interaction also contributed to SDZ adsorption.
Norfloxacin (NFX) and sulfadiazine (SDZ) are two widely used antibiotics belonging to fluoroquinolone and sulfonamide groups, respectively, and have become the commonly detected micropollutants in aquatic environments. However, only few works have been conducted to investigate the highly probable inhibition of these antibiotic pollutants to Arthrospira platensis, which is an important species of cyanobacteria that is one of primary producers in aquatic ecosystems and should be remarkably sensitive to environmental pollutants due to its prokaryotic characteristics. Hence, the toxicological effects and removal efficiencies of NFX and SDZ in culturing A. platensis were studied by analyzing the biomass growth, photosynthetic pigments, primary biocomponents, and antibiotics concentration. The corresponding variations of these characteristics showed the higher sensitivity of A. platensis to NFX than to SDZ, indicating the specifically targeted effect of NFX on A. platensis, which could be confirmed in silico by the higher binding affinity of NFX with the critical enzyme. The obtained results illustrated the roles of NFX and SDZ on the growth of A. platensis, thus providing the great support in employing A. platensis to reduce hazards from contaminated water and recover biomass resources.
The co-existence of hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) and norfloxacin (NOR) can be detected in natural environments. However, the interaction of the co-existing Cr(VI), NOR and ferrihydrite nanoparticles (FNPs, a ubiquitous natural iron oxide nanoparticle) is lacking investigation. Figuring out this interaction could help us better predict the transport and fate of the relevant contaminants. Here, the adsorption and aggregation of FNPs in the presence of Cr(VI) and NOR were investigated. Comparing to FNPs interaction with Cr(VI) or NOR alone, the co-existence of Cr(VI) and NOR could lead to a synergistic effect to increase their adsorption onto FNPs. This observation can be attributed to the complexation between Cr(VI) and carboxyl or amino groups from NOR. Furthermore, the aggregation of FNPs could be accelerated by Cr(VI) through charge neutralization since the adsorption of Cr(VI) could decrease the surface potential of FNPs (positive charge). However, the presence of NOR will increase the surface charge, and thus stabilize FNPs. In general, the aggregation state of FNPs in the presence of co-existing Cr(VI) and NOR depends on their ratio. Overall, these understandings help us predict the transport and fate of FNPs and the associated contaminants in natural environments.
Aim: To synthesize a novel series of norfloxacin analogs and to evaluate biological activity.Methodology: Novel norfloxacin analogs were synthesized and characterized by NMR and mass spectrometry. Antiproliferative and antioxidant properties were studied.Results: Compound 2f was the most potent against HeLa cell-line with 100% inhibition of cell viability IC(50) = 3.1 +/- 0.2 muM. All compounds exhibit moderate to excellent antioxidant properties. Docking study demonstrates higher binding affinity of compounds with respective anticancer (B-cell lymphoma-2) and (tyrosinase) antioxidant targets. In silico absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion profile of compounds proves all synthesized compounds follow Lipinski's rule of drug likeness, non toxic and possess passive gastrointestinal absorption.Conclusion: The biological profile suggest that the synthesized norfloxacin analogs can be a novel scaffold for future anticancer drug development.
Prediction of the properties and behavior of antibiotics is important for their risk assessment and pollution control. Theoretical calculation was incorporated in our experimental study to investigate the sorption of ofloxacin (OFL) and norfloxacin (NOR) on carbon nanotubes and their solubilities in water, methanol, and their mixture. Sorption for OFL and NOR decreased as methanol volume fractions (fc) increased. But the log-linear cosolvency model could not be applied as a general model to describe the cosolvent effect on OFL and NOR sorption. We computed the bond lengths of possible hydrogen bonds between solute and solvent and the corresponding interaction energies using Density Functional Theory. The decreased OFL solubility with increased fc could be attributed to the generally stronger hydrogen bond between OFL and H2O than that between OFL and CH3OH. Solubility of NOR varied nonmonotonically with increasing fc, which may be understood from the stronger hydrogen bond of NOR-CH3OH than NOR-H2O at two important sites (-O18 and -O21). The interaction energies were also calculated for the solute surrounded by solvent molecules at all the possible hydrogen bond sites, but it did not match the solubility variations with fc for both chemicals. The difference between the simulated and real systems was discussed. Similar sorption but different solubility of NOR and OFL from water-methanol cosolvent suggested that sorbate-solvent interaction seems not control their sorption.
A series of aminothiazolyl norfloxacin analogues as a new type of potential antimicrobial agents were synthesized and screened for their antimicrobial activities. Most of the prepared compounds exhibited excellent inhibitory efficiencies. Especially, norfloxacin analogue II-c displayed superior antimicrobial activities against K. pneumoniae and C. albicans with MIC values of 0.005 and 0.010 mM to reference drugs, respectively. This compound not only showed broad antimicrobial spectrum, rapid bactericidal efficacy and strong enzymes inhibitory potency including DNA gyrase and chitin synthase (CHS), low toxicity against mammalian cells and no obvious propensity to trigger the development of bacterial resistance, but also exerted efficient membrane permeability, and could effectively intercalate into K. pneumoniae DNA to form a steady supramolecular complex, which might block DNA replication to exhibit their powerful antimicrobial activity. Quantum chemical studies were also performed to explain the high antimicrobial activities. Molecular docking showed that compound II-c could bind with gyrase-DNA and topoisomerase IV-DNA through hydrogen bonds and pi-pi stacking.
AIM: Binary and ternary complexes with hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin (HPbetaCD), using glutamic acid (GA), proline or lysine as the third component, were developed to increase the solubility and the dissolution rate of norfloxacin (NOR). METHODS/RESULTS: Complexation was evaluated by phase solubility studies, obtaining the highest NOR solubility with GA and HPbetaCD. Thermal analysis suggested that different kinds of interactions occur among NOR, HPbetaCD and each amino acid, and when the systems were prepared by kneading or by means of freeze-drying technique. Dissolution studies, performed on simulated gastric fluid and subsequent simulated intestinal fluid, showed the highest rate of NOR from NOR-HPbetaCD-GA. CONCLUSION: NOR:HPbetaCD:GA was the best approach for improving the bioavailability of NOR.
The solar light-responsive Fe-doped Co-based coordination polymer (Fe@Co-CP) photocatalyst was synthesized under mild conditions. [Co(4-padpe)(1,3-BDC)](n) (Co-CP) was first constructed using mixed ligands through the hydrothermal method. Then, Fe was introduced into the Co-CP framework to achieve the enhanced photocatalytic activity. The optimal Fe@Co-CP-2 exhibited excellent catalytic degradation performance for norfloxacin and ciprofloxacin under sunlight irradiation without auxiliary oxidants, and the degradation rates were 91.25 and 92.66% in 120 min. These excellent photocatalytic properties were ascribed to the generation of the Fe-O bond, which not only enhanced the light absorption intensity but also accelerated the separation efficiency of electrons and holes, and hence significantly improved the photocatalytic property of the composites. Meanwhile, Fe@Co-CP-2 displayed excellent stability and reusability. In addition, the degradation pathways and intermediates of antibiotic molecules were effectively analyzed. The free radical scavenging experiment and ESR results confirmed that (*)OH, (*)O(2)(-), and h(+) active species were involved in the catalytic degradation reaction; the corresponding mechanisms were deeply investigated. This study provides a fresh approach for constructing Fe-doped Co-CP-based composite materials as photocatalysts for degradation of antibiotic contaminants.
A thin-layer chromatographic-densitometric method was used to determine the stability of ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin in the presence and absence of metal ions in acidic solutions at 22 degrees C, 50 degrees C and 90 degrees C. The degradation of ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin followed first order reaction kinetics in presence of metal ions. The extent of this degradation however depended on the type of metal ion and temperature. Product structures of ciprofloxacin (1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-7-(piperazin-1-yl)quinolin-4(1H)-one) and norfloxacin (1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-(piperazin-1-yl)quinolin-4(1H)-one) were determined by analysis of UV spectra and using LC-MS method.
