Trovafloxacin, sparfloxacin, ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin were equally active against Moraxella catarrhalis, Haemophilus influenzae, Legionella pneumophila, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter cloacae and Serratia marcescens. Ciprofloxacin was the most active compound against Pseudomonas aeruginosa (MIC90 = 1 mg/L), followed by trovafloxacin (MIC90 = 4 mg/L). Trovafloxacin was twice as active as sparfloxacin against Streptococcus pyogenes (MIC90 = 0.12 mg/L), Streptococcus pneumoniae (MIC90 = 0.12 mg/L) and Staphylococcus aureus (MIC90 = 0.06 mg/L) (except quinolone-resistant, methicillin-resistant S. aureus, for which the MIC90 was 8 mg/L). Trovafloxacin was the most active compound against Enterococcus faecalis: 80% of strains were susceptible to 0.25 mg/L. There was complete cross-resistance between all fluoroquinolones.
Drug-induced hallucinations are not uncommon, and may be misdiagnosed as psychiatric illness leading to unnecessary treatment with antipsychotics. If a temporal association of use of a drug having the potential to cause hallucinations is present, mere withdrawal of the drug causes complete improvement in the symptoms. There are reports of various untoward central nervous system adverse events following administration of fluoroquinolones, including delirium, hallucinations and psychosis, even after a single dose. We describe a 5-year-old girl who suffered visual hallucinations following ofloxacin use.
The synergistic potential of levofloxacin, ofloxacin and ciprofloxacin combined with aztreonam, ceftazidime, or piperacillin was compared using 24 strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa with varying susceptibility profiles. Levofloxacin and ciprofloxacin demonstrated similar in vitro activity, with ofloxacin demonstrating less activity compared to the other agents. Predominantly additive effects were seen with all combinations, with no significant differences detected between the fluoroquinolone agents.
Adsorption and transport of levofloxacin (LEV) and ofloxacin (OFL) enantiomers in a matrix containing goethite and natural organic matter (NOM) were investigated using batch and column experiments. In batch studies, competition and enantioselectivity were observed in the adsorption of LEV and OFL. Enantioselectivity upon adsorption was investigated by comparing changes in the enantiomer fraction (EF) (the ratio of LEV to the sum of LEV and OFL remaining in the solution) after and before adsorption. At pH < 7, there was hardly any selectivity in adsorption of OFL and LEV to goethite. At pH > 7, OFL showed a stronger adsorption than LEV to goethite, and this preference remained when NOM samples of Leonardite humic acid (LHA) and Elliott Soil fulvic acid (ESFA) were added. However, when Suwannee River NOM (SRNOM) was added, the preference was reversed, and LEV was adsorbed more strongly. In single systems, the presence of different types of NOM increased adsorption of LEV and OFL, especially LEV. In column studies, preloaded NOM decreased the transport of LEV and OFL through goethite-coated sand. The EF values in the effluent increased with retention time and reached the largest values (0.59-0.72) at around 1.5 pore volume (PV), and then decreased again, reaching a stable value at 5.0-30.0 PV. Both batch and column experiments showed that, fractionation of LEV and OFL occurred during adsorption and transport in the presence of NOM-goethite complexes, which would eventually affect their environmental fate.
Ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, and lomefloxacin are oral fluoroquinolones with ideal characteristics for oral antimicrobial therapy. These agents provide 1) appropriate and reliable serum concentrations, 2) broad antimicrobial activity, 3) proven efficacy in the treatment of serious infections, and 4) good tolerability. Although cations decrease the absorption of these drugs, there are proven means of avoiding these interactions. Therefore, these agents could easily be utilized as alternatives to prolonged intravenous treatment of many infectious diseases in patients who do not have conditions which impair drug absorption.
Given the markedly different pharmacological activities between enantiomeric isomers, it is crucial to encourage the stereoselective determination of chiral drugs in the biological and pharmaceutical fields, and the combination of drugs makes this analysis more complicated and challenging. Herein, a capillary electrophoresis (CE) method for the enantioseparation of ofloxacin and duloxetine was established, enabling the simultaneous identification of four isomers in nonracemic mixtures with enantiomeric excess (ee%) values exceeding 5%. This was achieved through the integration of theoretical simulation and electron circular dichroism (ECD), all without reliance on individual standards. Molecular modeling explained and verified the migration time differences of these isomers in electrophoretic separation. Moreover, the correlation coefficients (R(2) ) between the enantiomeric peak area differentials and ee% were both above 0.99. Recovery rates were quantified using bovine serum as the matrix, with results ranging from 93.32% to 101.03% (RSD = 0.030) and 92.69% to 100.52% (RSD = 0.028) for these two chiral drugs at an ee value of 23.1%, respectively.
The newer fluoroquinolones moxifloxacin (MXF) and levofloxacin (LVX) are becoming more common components of tuberculosis (TB) treatment regimens. However, the critical concentrations for testing susceptibility of Mycobacterium tuberculosis to MXF and LVX are not yet well established. Additionally, the degree of cross-resistance between ofloxacin (OFX) and these newer fluoroquinolones has not been thoroughly investigated. In this study, the MICs for MXF and LVX and susceptibility to the critical concentration of OFX were determined using the agar proportion method for 133 isolates of M. tuberculosis. Most isolates resistant to OFX had LVX MICs of >1 mug/ml and MXF MICs of >0.5 mug/ml. The presence of mutations within the gyrA quinolone resistance-determining regions (QRDR) correlated well with increased MICs, and the level of LVX and MXF resistance was dependent on the specific gyrA mutation present. Substitutions Ala90Val, Asp94Ala, and Asp94Tyr resulted in low-level MXF resistance (MICs were >0.5 but </=2 mug/ml), while other mutations led to MXF MICs of >2 mug/ml. Based on these results, a critical concentration of 1 mug/ml is suggested for LVX and 0.5 mug/ml for MXF drug susceptibility testing by agar proportion with reflex testing for MXF at 2 mug/ml.
Antibiotic pollution has become an important global issue, and ofloxacin (OFL) is widely used worldwide. However, little is known about the potential adverse effects of OFL on plants. We assessed the toxic effects of OFL on Welsh onion and explored its toxicity mechanism. The leaf pigment content increased in 0.1 mg/L of OFL but decreased in a dose-dependent manner (0.5-2 mg/L OFL) until leaf etiolation. The ultrastructure of leaves showed that the treatment of 2 mg/L OFL produced significant toxicity. Furthermore, photosynthetic and fluorescence parameters were negatively affected by OFL treatment. The photosynthetic electron transport chain was significantly inhibited by OFL treatment, especially between Q(A) and Q(B). The hydrogen peroxide and malondialdehyde content also increased with OFL concentration, indicating that antioxidant enzymes' role in antibiotic response is limited. In conclusion, OFL can damage chloroplasts by promoting ROS accumulation, which results in the etiolation of Welsh onion leaves.
Given their voluminous application, significant amounts of fluoroquinolones are discharged into the environment through wastewater effluent. Adsorption has been shown to be a critical process controlling the environmental behaviors of fluoroquinolones. Competition between ofloxacin (OFL) and naphthalene (NAP)/bisphenol A (BPA) and their adsorption on activated carbon (AC), graphite (GP), and humic acid (HA) were investigated. The suppressed adsorption of OFL was observed on AC and GP, but not on HA, by NAP or BPA. Moreover, for AC, the competition by NAP was slightly stronger than that by BPA. However, for GP, the competition with BPA was higher than that with NAP. These observations indicate that competitive adsorption of OFL with respect to NAP/BPA depends on the degree of overlap of adsorption sites, as interpreted by the following: (i) AC can provide overlapping adsorption sites for OFL, BPA, and NAP, which include non-specific adsorption sites, such as hydrophobic sites, pi-pi interactions, and micropore filling; (ii) pi-pi interactions and hydrogen bonding might be responsible for the strong competitive adsorption between BPA and OFL on GP; and (iii) OFL adsorbs on HA through specific adsorption force-electrostatic attraction, with which NAP and BPA cannot compete.
Ofloxacin, like other 4-quinolones, is unusual among front line drugs available to treat bacterial infections since it affects bacterial DNA synthesis, rather than cell wall or protein synthesis. The 4-quinolones are also unusual because even for serious infections they can be given orally. Most unusually transferable resistance mediated by plasmids does not affect the 4-quinolone antibacterials. Thus the only way that bacteria can resist these drugs is by chromosomal mutation. However, when mutants gain resistance, they can also lose pathogenicity, and even should mutants remain pathogenic then their resistance cannot transfer to other bacteria by conjugation.
Various mechanisms play roles simultaneously for antibiotic sorption on solid particles. Previous studies simply emphasized mechanisms that match the increased or decreased antibiotic sorption by metal ions, without a general concept including these diverse mechanisms in their co-sorption. We observed both increased and decreased OFL and Cu(II) sorption in their co-sorption system. The comparison of the sorption coefficients of primary adsorbate (Kd(pri)) and co-adsorbate (Kd(co)) suggested that enhanced sorption occurred at high Kd(pri) region (low primary adsorbate concentration). Competitive sorption was observed when Kd(pri) was decreased to a certain value depending on solid particle properties. We thus summarized that if the adsorbates were introduced with low concentrations, OFL (such as hydrophobic region in solid particles) and Cu(II) (such as inner-sphere complexation sites) occupied their unique high-energy sorption sites. Cu(II) complexed with the adsorbed OFL, and OFL bridged by the adsorbed Cu(II) promoted the sorption for both chemicals. With the increased concentrations, the adsorbates spread to some common sorption sites with low sorption energy, such as cation exchange and electrostatic attraction region. The overlapping of Cu(II) and OFL on these sorption sites resulted in competitive sorption at high concentrations. The previously reported apparently increased or decreased sorption in antibiotic-metal ion co-sorption system may be only a part of the whole picture. Extended study on the turning point of decreased and increased sorption relating to water chemistry conditions and solid particle properties will provide more useful information to predict antibiotic-metal ion co-sorption.
A highly sensitive spectrofluorimetric method was developed for the first time, for the analysis of three fluoroquinolones (FQ) antibacterials, namely enrofloxacin (ENR), levofloxacin (LEV) and ofloxacin (OFL) in pharmaceutical preparations through charge transfer (CT) complex formation with 2,3,5,6-tetrachloro-p-benzoquinone (chloranil,CLA). At the optimum reaction conditions, the FQ-CLA complexes showed excitation maxima ranging from 359 to 363nm and emission maxima ranging from 442 to 488nm. Rectilinear calibration graphs were obtained in the concentration range of 50-1000, 50-1000 and 25-500ngmL(-1) for ENR, LEV and OFL, respectively. The detection limit was found to be 17ngmL(-1) for ENR, 17ngmL(-1) for LEV, 8ngmL(-1) for OFL, respectively. Excipients used as additive in commercial formulations did not interfere in the analysis. The method was validated according to the ICH guidelines with respect to specificity, linearity, accuracy, precision and robustness. The proposed method was successfully applied to the analysis of pharmaceutical preparations. The results obtained were in good agreement with those obtained using the official method; no significant difference in the accuracy and precision as revealed by the accepted values of t- and F-tests, respectively.
Limited data on fluoroquinolone pharmacokinetics and cardiac effects in children exist. Among 22 children receiving drug-resistant tuberculosis prophylaxis or treatment, serum concentrations following oral doses of levofloxacin (15 mg/kg of body weight) and ofloxacin (20 mg/kg) were lower than those expected from existing pediatric data, possibly due to differences in the formulations (crushed tablets). Drug exposures were lower than those in adults following standard doses and below the proposed pharmacodynamic targets, likely due to more rapid elimination in children. No QT prolongation was observed.
Antibiotics are used widely in human and veterinary medicine and are ubiquitous in environmental matrices worldwide. The influence of the concentration of antibiotics on adsorption kinetics is still unclear. This study used sulfamethoxazole (SMX) and ofloxacin (OFL) as adsorbates to investigate the adsorption kinetics on sediment affected by varying concentrations of antibiotics adsorbable species. At the experimental pH values, the major adsorbed species of SMX and OFL on sediment were SMX(0) and OFL(+) by hydrophobic interaction and electrostatic attraction, respectively. The apparent adsorption rate of SMX was not affected by the initial concentration and the pH values because the hydrophobic interactions were concentration-independent and charge-independent. However, the apparent adsorption rate of OFL significantly slowed down as the initial concentration increased. The adsorbed OFL(+) effectively neutralized the negative charges of the sediment, leading to a reduced adsorption rate of subsequent OFL(+). The neutralization effect was greatly enhanced due to the increased OFL(+) with the increasing OFL concentration. Additionally, the apparent adsorption rate of OFL significantly increased at higher pH due to the reduced neutralization effect that resulted from the decreased OFL(+) and increased negative charges of the sediment surface. This study implied that the adsorption kinetics of antibiotics was greatly dominated by the concentration of adsorbable species rather than apparent overall concentration.
We describe a patient with hypersensitivity vasculitis due to ofloxacin therapy; the vasculitis was associated with elevated transaminase and IgA levels. Cyclophosphamide and intravenous pulse prednisolone resulted in clinical improvement.
