Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are highly effective antihypertensive agents with excellent safety profiles. ARBs have been shown to improve cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in hypertensive patients with heart failure or diabetic nephropathy. For this later class of patients, the American Diabetes Association recommends ARBs as the primary treatment option. The ARBs function by blocking the binding of angiotensin-II (A-II) to its receptor, thereby inhibiting the action of A-II. Unlike the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, which block the production of A-II through the ACE pathway, the ARBs effectively inhibit A-II regardless of whether it is produced through ACE or some alternate enzyme pathway. This difference in action offers a distinct advantage of ARBs over ACE inhibitors. Olmesartan medoxomil, the latest addition to the ARB class, is a long-acting, safe and well-tolerated antihypertensive drug. The combination of olmesartan medoxomil with a low-dose diuretic, potentiates the blood pressure lowering effect of either agent alone and is highly effective in achieving the recommended blood pressure goals in the majority of patients treated.
Hypertension is an increasingly prevalent cardiovascular risk factor associated with high rates of morbidity and mortality. Lowering blood pressure (BP) to recommended levels reduces the risk of hypertension-associated cardiovascular events. Despite current treatment options and recommendations, the BP of many patients remains suboptimally controlled. There is a need for more effective management in patients not achieving BP goals on current monotherapy or combination therapy. Regimens combining three or more antihypertensive agents have been shown to increase the proportion of patients achieving BP goals. Recent data suggest that the combination of olmesartan medoxomil, amlodipine and hydrochlorothiazide is a rational treatment option offering safe and effective BP reductions and goal attainment in a greater proportion of patients compared with dual-combination regimens. As the understanding of the importance of BP control grows, treatment options that enable patients to achieve BP goals quickly and safely will become increasingly important in hypertension management.
Elderly patients with resistant hypertension are at increased risk for cardiovascular events. Clinical trials suggest that resistant hypertension involves perhaps 10-15% of hypertension study participants. In this study, 157 resistant hypertension patients older than 60 years were randomized to 8 weeks double-blind treatment with placebo, AML 10 mg/day, OM 40 mg/day and AMxL (10 mg/day)+OM (40 mg/day). Research outcomes suggested that ALM+OM combination therapy had superior efficacy than ALM or OM monotherapies in terms of the clinic blood pressure and 24-h ambulatory blood pressure. In addition, more patients receiving combination therapy (62.5%) achieved BP goal than those treated with placebo (18.4%), AML (37.5) or OM (38.5%) monotherapies. The adverse events in both groups were comparable. Thus, the combination of AML+OM provides a safe and effective option for the treatment of resistant hypertension in challenging elderly patient populations.
BACKGROUND: Most patients with hypertension require more than one drug to attain recommended blood pressure (BP) targets. Initiating therapy with two agents is recommended for patients at high risk of a cardiovascular event or with a BP > 20/10 mmHg above goal. Combination therapy is effective when comprised of agents with complementary mechanisms of action, such as calcium channel blockers (CCBs) and angiotensin II-receptor blockers (ARBs). Two fixed-dose CCB/ARB combinations are approved in the US: amlodipine/valsartan (AML/VAL) and amlodipine/olmesartan medoxomil (AML/OM). OBJECTIVES: To review and describe the efficacy of AML/VAL and AML/OM combinations by discussing similarly designed clinical trials. METHODS: Three 8-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group factorial-design studies were examined (two AML/VAL; one AML/OM). The study endpoints presented in this review were: change from baseline in least-squares mean seated diastolic BP (SeDBP) and least-squares mean seated systolic BP (SeSBP). In addition to the efficacies of AML/VAL and AML/OM combinations, the efficacies of AML, VAL and OM administered as monotherapy are presented. Placebo-subtracted BP reductions were calculated for this review. RESULTS: Patient demographics were similar but mean baseline SeBP was higher in the OM study (163.8/101.6 mmHg) than in the VAL studies (152.8/99.3 and 156.7/99.1 mmHg), possibly suggesting that the OM study included a more difficult-to-treat patient population. AML/ARB combinations consistently produced greater mean SeBP reductions than monotherapy. Least squares (LS) mean SeDBP reductions were 19.4 mmHg (AML/OM 10/40 mg; placebo-corrected: 15.9 mmHg) and 18.6 mmHg (AML/VAL 10/320 mg; placebo-corrected: 9.8 mmHg). LS mean SeSBP reductions were 28.5 mmHg (AML/OM 10/40 mg; placebo-corrected: 25.7 mmHg) and 28.4 mmHg (AML/VAL 10/320 mg; placebo-corrected: 15.5 mmHg). CONCLUSIONS: This review of published factorial-design studies showed that the maximal marketed doses of an amlodipine/olmesartan medoxomil combination (10/40 mg) and an amlodipine/valsartan combination (10/320 mg) produced large reductions in BP from baseline. Limitations of this review include the small number of studies analyzed and the inherent heterogeneity between patient populations. Further research is warranted to directly compare the efficacy of these combinations in a randomized, controlled trial, or additional published clinical trials are required to provide larger data sets for robust meta-analyses and to overcome heterogeneity observed within these studies.
Angiotensin receptor antagonists (angiotensin receptor blockers; ARBs) are an effective initial antihypertensive monotherapy in many patients. However, when initial ARB monotherapy fails to achieve the recommended BP goal, there is some controversy as to whether dose uptitration or the addition of a diuretic is more appropriate. This article addresses this issue by reviewing the dose-response characteristics of olmesartan medoxomil and other ARBs, as well as the relationship between ARB uptitration and BP goal attainment. Two types of trial designs are used to assess dose response: dose-ranging studies (usually a parallel design using different doses across different patient groups), which are used to establish the optimal dose for US FDA registration purposes, and dose-titration studies (increased dosing within the same patients and treating to goal BP). Since dose titration is within the same patient, it may be considered more appropriate for demonstrating dose-response characteristics and demonstration of BP goal attainment. While results from dose-ranging studies suggest that the dose-response curve for some ARBs may be flat, dose-titration studies indicate that significant improvements in BP control and BP goal attainment can be achieved with ARB uptitration. In an integrated analysis of seven US and European randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging trials involving 3055 patients with stage 2 hypertension treated with olmesartan medoxomil 2.5-80 mg/day or placebo for 8 weeks, all olmesartan medoxomil doses were significantly more effective than placebo in lowering the mean DBP and mean SBP (p<or=0.001); notably, optimal BP-lowering efficacy was observed at higher dosages. In fact, the 20 mg/day (recommended starting dose) and 40 mg/day (maximum approved dose) dosages were significantly (p<or=0.001) more effective in lowering mean BP than the 5 mg/day dosage (optional starting dose in volume-depleted patients), and the 40 mg/day dosage was significantly (p<0.01) more effective than the 20 mg/day dosage. The BP decreases observed with the uptitration of olmesartan medoxomil from 20 to 40 mg/day doses resulted in substantial additional mean BP reductions from baseline. Such BP reductions have been shown to translate into a clinically relevant increase in the number of patients who achieve BP goal. In conventional clinical studies, the shallow dose-response findings often attributed to ARBs may be an artifact resulting from the inclusion of both treatment responders and nonresponders within each dose group. However, this may not accurately reflect the results that are actually obtained in clinical practice. The efficacy of certain ARBs, such as olmesartan medoxomil, is dose-dependent, with greater reductions being attained at higher doses; higher BP goal attainment rates are achieved with the higher doses. Thus, ARB monotherapy, with appropriate uptitration as needed, is an excellent initial treatment option for patients with hypertension.
BACKGROUND: Poor compliance with treatment and early discontinuation negatively affect long-term blood pressure control. According to the Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure, poor compliance could contribute to the lack of adequate blood pressure control in approximately 70% of patients with hypertension, even after treatment with several antihypertensive drugs. OBJECTIVE: This article discusses blood pressure control and patient compliance with antihypertensive drugs. It then outlines the clinical pharmacokinetics and interaction profile of the novel antihypertensive olmesartan medoxomil, an angiotensin II receptor antagonist (AIIRA), and relates the findings to the recommended dosing regimen and tolerability of the drug. CONCLUSIONS: Many factors influence patient compliance, including forgetfulness, adverse effects, irregular lifestyle, and complexity of drug regimen, such as multiple drugs and, in particular, frequent dosing. Drugs that are well tolerated and easy to manage in a once-daily regimen improve compliance. In a study of different classes of antihypertensive drugs, patients taking AIIRAs were more likely to continue their treatment than those taking any other class of antihypertensive. Therefore, the right drug choice may contribute to patient compliance. The newest member of the AIIRAs, olmesartan medoxomil, is a long-acting antihypertensive drug with a favorable safety and tolerability profile. It is not metabolized by and does not interfere with the cytochrome P-450 enzyme system. These properties meet modern requirements for the treatment of hypertension.
Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) have been available in the United States since 1995. These agents have demonstrated antihypertensive efficacy at least similar to that of agents from other antihypertensive classes. Recent large-scale, randomized, controlled clinical trials have demonstrated that ARBs offer cardiovascular and renal protective benefits independent of their effects on systemic blood pressure (BP), which make them valuable as first-line antihypertensive agents, especially in high-risk patients. However, as is the case with other antihypertensive classes, monotherapy with the first-available ARBs (losartan potassium, valsartan, and irbesartan) may not provide sufficient BP reduction to achieve currently recommended BP goals in many patients. The diuretic hydrochlorothiazide is frequently added to enhance the ability of ARBs to lower BP. Several head-to-head comparison studies have shown differences in antihypertensive efficacy among the available ARBs. The newest ARB, olmesartan medoxomil, was recently compared with losartan potassium, irbesartan, and valsartan in a prospective, head-to-head, randomized trial. In this study, olmesartan medoxomil demonstrated a significantly greater reduction in diastolic BP, the primary end point, compared with the other three ARBs. Further, a review of the absolute reductions in diastolic BP achieved with olmesartan medoxomil monotherapy appears comparable to that of previously available ARBs when they are used in combination with hydrochlorothiazide. These comparisons may have important clinical implications regarding the optimal choice of first-line antihypertensive therapy.
Olmesartan medoxomil is an angiotensin II (Ang II) receptor blocker (ARB) that has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of hypertension. It is a prodrug that is hydrolysed in the gut into its active metabolite, olmesartan (RNH-6270). Olmesartan is highly selective for the Ang II type 1 receptor (AT1) to which it binds completely and insurmountably and has very little affinity for the other receptor subtypes AT2 and AT4. After oral administration, in animals and humans, it achieves a maximal blood drug concentration within a maximal time of approximately 2 h. It is then slowly eliminated in the urine and faeces. His half-life is approximately 13 h, which makes it suitable for once-daily administration. Olmesartan medoxomil given orally in single daily doses of 20-40 mg has demonstrated significant blood pressure (BP) lowering effects in hypertensive patients. A medline search for the preparation of this manuscript was conducted and revealed 128 references, from 2000 to 2007. Of these, only 16 well-designed prospective clinical trials were selected. The remaining were either animal studies, reviews or studies in progress. In well-designed clinical trials, olmesartan medoxomil has demonstrated similar antihypertensive actions to the other antihypertensive drugs, as well as other members of its class given the highest recommended doses. In addition, the BP lowering effect of olmesartan, like the other members of its class, is greatly enhanced in combination with a diuretic. Its safety profile is similar to the other ARBs and no different than placebo.
Hexadecane membrane-parallel artificial membrane permeability assay (HDM-PAMPA) is based on an artificial HDM that separates the two compartments (donor and acceptor compartment). This model is used to predict the permeability of drugs in gastrointestinal tract and to simulate the passive absorption. In vivo behavior of the drugs can be estimated with these systems in drug development studies. In our study, we optimized HDM-PAMPA model to determine permeability of olmesartan medoxomil (OM) lipid based drug delivery system (OM-LBDDS). In order to prove that LBDDS formulation facilitates the weak permeability of OM, permeation rates were compared with the OM suspension formula (containing 0.25% v/w carboxymethylcellulose). The experiment was performed on a 96-well MultiScreen(R) PAMPA filter plate (MAIPN4510). The permeability of olmesartan formulations from the donor to acceptor compartment separated by a HDM membrane were determined by the previous validated HPLC method. We created positive control series without coating HDM to present the LBDDS and suspension formulation permeability from uncoated plates. The effective permeability constant (P(e)) was calculated by the formula and improvement of permeability of OM-LBDDS formulation from HDM was confirmed. On the contrary there was no permeation of OM-Suspension in the hexadecane coated plates. As a result, the intestinal permeability of OM-LBDDS was calculated to be at least 100 times more than the suspension. OM-Suspension permeation was only observed in the hexadecane uncoated positive control plates. This was also manifestation of HDM-PAMPA mimicking permeability of intestines because of its lipidic construction.
