Pipamperon is a potent neuroleptic drug with many side effects, including prolongation of the QT interval. We report a case of a child treated for leukemia in which prolongation of the QT interval was observed. Physicians and pharmacists should be cautious for drug-drug interactions when pipamperon is prescribed, especially in combination with other QT-prolongating agents. Alternative strategies should be used whenever possible.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacological approaches to opiate addiction have for the most part been limited to a role in detoxification. A high percentage of patients who complete detoxification programmes relapse. METHOD: In the present study, we used a simple laboratory method to investigate suggestions from preclinical studies that 5-(hydroxytryptamine) HT3 receptor antagonists have a role in the treatment of addiction. RESULTS: We showed that addicts stably maintained on methadone experienced significant craving, dysphoria, and withdrawal-like symptoms when exposed to a video containing drug-related cues. The craving was not lessened by treatment with the 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, ondansetron (4 mg orally). CONCLUSION: Our current findings do not support a role for 5-HT3 receptor agonists in the reduction of craving in opiate addicts.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: To explore the risk of cardiac arrhythmias associated with ondansetron administration in the context of recent recommendations for identification of high-risk individuals. METHODS: We conducted a postmarketing analysis and systematically reviewed the published literature, grey literature, manufacturer's database, Food and Drug Administration Adverse Events Reporting System, and the World Health Organization Individual Safety Case Reports Database (VigiBase). Eligible cases described a documented (or perceived) arrhythmia within 24 hours of ondansetron administration. The primary outcome was arrhythmia occurrence temporally associated with the administration of a single, oral ondansetron dose. Secondary objectives included identifying all cases associating ondansetron administration (any dose, frequency, or route) to an arrhythmia. RESULTS: Primary: No reports describing an arrhythmia associated with single oral ondansetron dose administration were identified. Secondary: Sixty unique reports were identified. Route of administration was predominantly intravenous (80%). A significant medical history (67%) or concomitant use of a QT-prolonging medication (67%) was identified in 83% of reports. Approximately one third occurred in patients receiving chemotherapeutic agents, many of which are known to prolong the QT interval. An additional third involved administration to prevent postoperative vomiting. CONCLUSION: Current evidence does not support routine ECG and electrolyte screening before single oral ondansetron dose administration to individuals without known risk factors. Screening should be targeted to high-risk patients and those receiving ondansetron intravenously.
Ondansetron is a 5-HT(3) receptor antagonist that has been approved for the prevention of nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgery. Ondansetron has also been studied in the treatment of many neuropsychiatric and medical conditions. The drug is commonly used off-label to treat nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP) and hyperemesis gravidarum (HG). Ondansetron crosses the placental barrier, and concerns have been expressed that using ondansetron for NVP/HG during the first trimester of pregnancy may increase the risk of major congenital malformations (MCMs) in the offspring. In this context, findings from a meta-analysis of 6 cohort and 2 case-control studies, read along with the results of subsequently published cohort (n = 3) and case-control (n = 1) studies, suggest that a signal does exist to associate early gestational exposure to ondansetron with an increased risk of heart defects and orofacial defects. Arguments both for and against confounding by indication have been proposed to explain these findings. Nevertheless, even if ondansetron is causally implicated in MCM risk, the absolute increase in risk, such as for orofacial clefts (by 0.03%) and ventricular septal defect (by 0.3%), is small. These small risks should be balanced against the risks associated with inadequately treated NVP/HG, and decision-making must be shared between clinician and patient. Repeated fetal scanning during the second trimester can help in the early detection of malformations, if present.
AIMS: To investigate whether ondansetron use during pregnancy is associated with increased rates of major or subgroups of malformations. METHODS: PubMed/MEDLINE, Cochrane and Reprotox((R)) databases were searched. Observational studies comprising an exposed and control group (healthy and/or disease-matched) were included. RESULTS: No significant increased risk for major malformations, heart defects, orofacial clefts, genitourinary malformations or hypospadias were identified in our primary analysis. A significant heterogeneity existed for isolated cleft palate. Elevated point estimates and altered statistical significances were present for some of the outcomes among secondary analyses. CONCLUSIONS: Ondansetron use during pregnancy was not associated with a significant increase in rate of major or selected subgroups of malformations in our primary analysis. However, results of the secondary analyses warrant the need for continued surveillance. These results may be reassuring for pregnant women in whom ondansetron use is clinically indicated since the absolute risks of possible concerns appear to be low.
OBJECTIVE: To use data from two large studies of birth defects to describe time trends in ondansetron use for the treatment of first-trimester nausea and vomiting of pregnancy and to investigate associations, either previously reported or undescribed, between first-trimester ondansetron use and major birth defects. METHODS: We used data from two case-control studies, the National Birth Defects Prevention Study (1997-2011) and the Slone Birth Defects Study (1997-2014). The prevalence of ondansetron use for the treatment of first-trimester nausea and vomiting of pregnancy among control patients was calculated in 2-year intervals. Using women with untreated first-trimester nausea and vomiting of pregnancy as the reference, we calculated adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs for associations between first-trimester ondansetron use for treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy and specific birth defects. A secondary exposure group of other prescription antiemetics was used to address confounding by indication. RESULTS: In the National Birth Defects Prevention Study and Slone Birth Defects Study, respectively, 6,751 and 5,873 control mothers and 14,667 and 8,533 case mothers who reported first-trimester nausea and vomiting of pregnancy were included in the analysis. Among women in the control group, ondansetron exposure increased from less than 1% before 2000 to 13% in 2013-2014. Ondansetron use was not associated with an increased risk for most of the 51 defect groups analyzed. Modest increases in risk were observed for cleft palate (adjusted OR 1.6, 95% CI 1.1-2.3) in the National Birth Defects Prevention Study and renal agenesis-dysgenesis (adjusted OR 1.8, 95% CI 1.1-3.0) in the Birth Defects Study, although these findings may be the result of chance. CONCLUSION: Off-label use of ondansetron for the treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy increased to 13% by the end of the study period. For the majority of specific birth defects investigated, there was no increased risk associated with first-trimester use of ondansetron for treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy compared with no treatment, although modest associations with cleft palate and renal agenesis-dysgenesis warrant further study.
OBJCTIVE: The objectives were to evaluate the safety and efficacy of ondansetron in the out-of-hospital treatment of undifferentiated nausea or vomiting. METHODS: Patients with severe nausea or intractable vomiting who were transported by paramedic-staffed ambulances in eight California counties were treated with intravenous (IV), intramuscular (IM), or oral dissolving tablet (ODT) administration of ondansetron. Data were collected prospectively for a six-month period using an online database. Prospectively defined outcome measures were 1) efficacy as measured by a quantitative visual analog nausea scale and 2) incidence of adverse effects. There were no control or placebo groups. RESULTS: Data was collected for 2072 patients, but one patient did not receive the medication. Therefore, Ondansetron was administered to 2,071 patients (3.7% of transported patients). Most patients were adult, with only 66 patients less than 18 years old. Of the 2,071 patients, 1,320 (64%) received IV administration, 77 (4%) received IM administration, and 674 (33%) received ODT administration of ondansetron. Intravenous administration resulted in the largest improvements in nausea scores (mean 4.4; 95% confidence interval [CI] 4.2, 4.5), followed by IM (mean 3.6; 95% CI 3.0, 4.3) and ODT (mean 3.3; 95% CI 3.1, 3.5). Overall, the mean decrease in nausea score was 4.0 (95% CI 3.9, 4.1; p < 0.001) on a 10-point scale. After medication administration, four patients had mild hypotension, one had hypertension, two had itching or rash, and one had a brief episode of supraventricular tachycardia that resolved spontaneously. CONCLUSIONS: Ondansetron is safe and effective for out-of-hospital treatment of nausea and vomiting when administered by paramedics via the IV, IM, or oral route. When available to paramedics, ondansetron is used frequently.
Hypotension and bradycardia are common adverse effects following spinal anesthesia. Ondansetron has been studied in the attenuation of spinal anesthesia- induced hypotension (SIH) and bradycardia because of its antagonistic effect on the Bezold-Jarisch reflex. The purpose of this systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) was to determine the efficacy of intravenous (IV) ondansetron in reducing the incidence of SIH and bradycardia. Thirteen RCTs were included in this analysis, totaling 1,225 subjects. Hypotension and bradycardia were summarized using a risk ratio (RR) with 95% confidence interval (CI). Heterogeneity was summarized using randomeffects model for I(2) greater than 50%; otherwise, a fixed-effects model was performed. Intravenous ondansetron reduced the incidence of hypotension in both the all-procedure analysis group (RR, 0.64; CI, 0.45-0.90) and cesarean delivery group (RR, 0.63; CI, 0.45-0.88). For bradycardia, IV ondansetron resulted in reduced risk (RR, 0.31; CI, 0.19-0.50). Findings of our meta-analysis suggest that IV ondansetron may mitigate the risks of SIH and bradycardia following spinal anesthesia.
BACKGROUND: Postoperative nausea and vomiting is a common side effect of general anesthesia. In this study, we performed a meta-analysis on the efficacy and safety of ramosetron versus ondansetron in the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting using the most recently published randomized controlled clinical studies. METHODS: PubMed and EMBASE were searched for randomized controlled clinical trials comparing the efficacy and safety of ramosetron and ondansetron. The meta-analysis was performed using Review Manager version 5.3 (Cochrane Collaboration, Oxford, UK). Dichotomous outcomes are presented as the relative risk (RR) with a 95% confidence interval (CI). RESULTS: A total of 898 patients from nine selected studies were treated with antiemetics after surgery, including 450 patients who received ondansetron 4 mg and 448 patients who received ramosetron 0.3 mg. The meta-analysis showed no statistically significant difference between the two groups with regard to prevention of postoperative nausea (PON) during different time periods in the 48 hours after surgery. When comparing the efficacy of ramosetron and ondansetron in the prevention of postoperative vomiting (POV), at various time intervals in the 24 hours after surgery, ramosetron was significantly more efficient than ondansetron: 0-6 hours (RR 0.46, 95% CI 0.24-0.92; P=0.03), 0-24 hours (RR 0.72, 95% CI 0.52-1.00; P=0.05), and 6-24 hours (RR 0.51, 95% CI 0.31-0.84; P=0.008). At other time periods between 24 and 48 hours after surgery, ramosetron did not show better efficacy than ondansetron. When comparing the safety profiles of ramosetron and ondansetron, fewer side effects were recorded in the ramosetron group (RR 0.65, 95% CI 0.47-0.91; P=0.01). CONCLUSION: Our meta-analysis demonstrates that ramosetron was more effective than ondansetron in the prevention of early POV (0-24 hours) with fewer recorded side effects. However, our study did not reveal any statistically significant differences in efficacy between ramosetron and ondansetron in the prevention of PON or late POV (at 24-48 hours).
Ondansetron is a selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist which has previously been reported in the Journal to be a promising new agent for use as prophylaxis against nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Since the publication of this original review, further studies have been published that show ondansetron to be an effective antiemetic agent in patients receiving chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Several studies have shown ondansetron to be a more effective antiemetic agent than high-dose metoclopramide in patients with emesis induced by high- and low-dose cisplatin treatment, and noncisplatin chemotherapy-induced emesis. The drug as mono-therapy does not appear to offer any advantage over alternative therapies against delayed high-dose cisplatin-induced nausea and vomiting; however, extremely limited data suggest that ondansetron plus dexamethasone may be useful in this indication. Trials have shown combination therapy with ondansetron and dexamethasone to be significantly more effective than both ondansetron monotherapy and a standard antiemetic regimen comprising metoclopramide, dexamethasone and diphenhydramine against acute high-dose cisplatin-induced emesis. Results from a number of small scale trials suggest that ondansetron may be an effective treatment for chemotherapy-induced emesis refractory to conventional antiemetic therapy. Ondansetron also appears to be more effective against refractory emesis induced by noncisplatin chemotherapy than that induced by cisplatin chemotherapy. Several trials have shown ondansetron to be more effective than placebo as prophylaxis against postoperative nausea and vomiting; a further trial has shown single-dose ondansetron to be significantly more effective than single-dose droperidol or metoclopramide in this indication. In addition, several trials have shown ondansetron to be more effective than placebo as treatment for nausea and vomiting that has commenced postoperatively. The overall incidence of adverse events in ondansetron recipients during chemotherapy-induced emesis studies was 36%. Headache and constipation are the most common adverse events during ondansetron therapy. Thus, recent data affirms the efficacy of ondansetron in the treatment of acute chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and shows it to be especially efficacious when combined with dexamethasone. It appears that the drug will also have a substantial role in the prophylaxis and treatment of postoperative nausea and vomiting.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the efficacy and safety of ondansetron for the prevention and treatment of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) in adults. DESIGN: Systematic review of published double-blind randomised controlled trials. DATA SOURCES: Twenty seven trials from 1990 to July 1998 retrieved from a systematic literature search (Medline, Cinahl, Embase, Cochrane Library, reference lists, hand searching of anaesthetic journals, & provided manufacturer information); restricted to English language. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Estimation of efficacy (incidence of complete absence of nausea or other outcome measure as defined by the authors) at 24 hours. RESULTS: Seven double-blind randomised controlled trials with 1,623 patients studied intravenous ondansetron 1 mg, 4 mg, or 8 mg for the treatment of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). Four mg, compared with metoclopramide 10 mg, produced higher patient satisfaction scores and an increased incidence of freedom from nausea at 24 hours. Further studies are required to compare the safety, efficacy and dose response with other anti-emetics at 24 hours. Twenty double-blind randomised controlled trials with 4,364 patients studied intravenous and oral administration of ondansetron 1 mg, 4 mg, and 8 mg for the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting. There appears to be no significant difference between droperidol (0.625 mg, 1 mg or 1.25 mg) i.v. and ondansetron 4 mg in efficacy and incidence of side effects. Compared with metoclopramide, ondansetron produced less nausea but the incidence of vomiting was the same at 24 hours. CONCLUSIONS: Further PONV could be prevented with ondansetron 4 mg compared with placebo and metoclopramide 10 mg. Further studies are required to compare ondansetron with other anti-emetics for the treatment of PONV. For prophylaxis of PONV ondansetron 4 mg appears to be equal to low dose droperidol in efficacy and the incidence of side effects, and superior to metoclopramide. Ondansetron should perhaps be limited to second line treatment in view of patient satisfaction, efficacy and cost when compared with droperidol.
This review aimed to meta-analyze evidence of efficacy and safety of one single dose of ondansetron for vomiting in children and adolescents with acute gastroenteritis. Database searches of MEDLINE (PubMed), Scopus (Elsevier), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), and ClinicalTrials.gov up to November 2019 were performed. Only randomized clinical trials versus placebo were considered. Fixed and random effect models were used for the analyses of pooled data. Thirteen randomized clinical trials (2146 patients) were finally included. One single dose of ondansetron showed to produce (1) higher chance of vomiting cessation within 8 h (RR 1.41, 95% CI 1.19-1.68; low-quality evidence); (2) lower chances of oral rehydration therapy failure (RR 0.43, 95% CI 0.34-0.55; high-quality evidence), intravenous hydration needs (RR 0.44, 95% CI 0.34-0.57; high-quality evidence), and hospitalization rates within 8 h (RR 0.49, 95% CI 0.32-0.75; high-quality evidence); and (3) no statistically significant differences in return visits to emergency department (RR 1.14, 95% CI 0.74-1.76; high-quality evidence) compared with placebo. Further studies are necessary to better assess long term efficacy and safety of ondansetron in this context.Conclusions: Mixed evidence was found via few studies about the efficacy and safety of a single dose of ondansetron in the pediatric population.What is known:* Ondansetron use for vomiting in pediatric acute gastroenteritis is increasing worldwide.* Actual convictions come from studies evaluating one and more than one dose of the drug.What is new:* This is the first review to collect data about the effects of one single dose of ondansetron on strong and temporally homogeneous clinical outcomes.* This study supports the use of one dose of ondansetron in pediatric acute gastroenteritis.* Further studies are necessary to assess its long-term efficacy and safety.
INTRODUCTION: Ondansetron is a 5-HT(3) receptor antagonist commonly used as an antiemetic to prevent nausea and vomiting associated with anti-cancer drugs, cancer radiotherapy or postoperatively. Recently, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a warning for ondansetron due to a potential for prolongation of the QT interval of the electrocardiogram (ECG), a phenomenon that is associated with an increased risk of the potentially fatal arrhythmia torsade de pointes. AREAS COVERED: The authors undertook a review of the cardiac safety of ondansetron. Their primary sources of information were PubMed (with downloading of full articles) and the Internet. EXPERT OPINION: The dose of ondansetron that the FDA has concerns about is 32 mg i.v. (or several doses that are equivalent to this), which is only used in preventing nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy. This suggests that ondansetron may be safe in lower doses used to prevent nausea and vomiting in radiation treatment or postoperatively. However, as there is a report that a lower dose of ondansetron prolonged the QT interval in healthy volunteers, this needs to be clarified by the FDA. More research needs to be undertaken on the relationship between QT prolongation and torsades in order that the FDA can produce clear-cut evidence of proarrhythmic risk when introducing warnings for this.
BACKGROUND: Postoperative nausea and vomiting is a distressing complication of surgery, and 5-HT3 receptor antagonists are often prescribed to prevent it. Ondansetron is the agent typically administered to prevent postoperative nausea and vomiting. Although ramosetron has a longer duration of action than ondansetron, it remains unclear whether ramosetron is the more effective medication. We performed an updated meta-analysis on the comparative efficacy of ramosetron and ondansetron in preventing postoperative nausea and vomiting. METHODS: We searched six databases for all trials that randomly assigned patients to ramosetron or ondansetron groups. The primary outcome was postoperative nausea or vomiting in the early, late, and next-day periods. The secondary outcomes were side effects of the medications. We used the random-effects model to combine the results. Trial sequential analyses were performed to correct for repetitive testing in the updated meta-analysis. RESULTS: Twenty-seven randomized controlled trials with 3,811 patients were included in the meta-analysis. The combined results of ramosetron vs. ondansetron efficacy in preventing postoperative nausea and vomiting were as follows: Risk ratio [95% confidence interval] = 0.82 [0.69-0.98] for early postoperative nausea, 0.76 [0.65-0.89] for late postoperative nausea, 0.69 [0.57-0.84] for next-day postoperative nausea, 0.78 [0.63-0.98] for early postoperative vomiting, 0.57 [0.45-0.72] for late postoperative vomiting, and 0.61 [0.43-0.86] for next-day postoperative vomiting. Dizziness was significantly lower in ramosetron groups than in ondansetron groups (risk ratio [95% confidence interval] = 0.81 [0.66-0.98]). Trial sequential analysis revealed that the results for late postoperative nausea, late postoperative vomiting, and next-day postoperative nausea were conclusive. CONCLUSIONS: Ramosetron is more effective in preventing late postoperative nausea, late postoperative vomiting, and next-day postoperative nausea than ondansetron. The incidence of dizziness may be lower in patients receiving ramosetron than in patients receiving ondansetron. TRIAL REGISTRATION: University hospital Medical Information Network Clinical Trials Registry: UMIN000022980.
BACKGROUND: Disagreement among many underpowered studies has led to an equivocal understanding of the efficacy of the 5-HT3 antagonist ondansetron in preventing the consequences of sympathectomy after subarachnoid anesthesia. The authors assessed the efficacy of ondansetron with respect to the overall quality and statistical power of the meta-analyses. METHODS: The authors used a standard and a newer method of meta-analysis, trial sequential analysis (TSA), to estimate adjusted CIs based on how much information has been accrued. They also used random-effects meta-analyses techniques, small trial bias assessment, selection models, sensitivity analyses, and the Grading of Recommendations on Assessment, Development, and Evaluation system. These results from the aforementioned techniques were compared, and importance of consideration of these factors was discussed. RESULTS: Fourteen randomized placebo-controlled trials (1,045 subjects) were identified and analyzed. By using conventional meta-analyses, the authors determined that ondansetron was associated with reduction in the incidence of hypotension (relative risk = 0.62 [95% CI, 0.46 to 0.83], P = 0.001; TSA-adjusted CI, 0.34 to 1.12; I = 60%, P = 0.002) and bradycardia (relative risk = 0.44 [95% CI, 0.26 to 0.73], P = 0.001; TSA-adjusted CI, 0.05 to 3.85; I = 0%, P = 0.84). However, the authors found indications of bias among these trials. TSAs demonstrated that the meta-analysis lacked adequate information size and did not achieve statistical significance when adjusted for sparse data and repetitive testing. The Grading of Recommendations on Assessment, Development, and Evaluation system showed that the results had low to very low quality of evidence. CONCLUSIONS: The analyses fail to confirm evidence that ondansetron reduces the incidence of hypotension and bradycardia after subarachnoid anesthesia due to the risk of bias and information sizes less than the required. As results from meta-analysis are given significant weight, it is important to carefully evaluate the quality of the evidence that is input.
BACKGROUND: Acute gastroenteritis (AGE) affects almost all children aged </=5 years. In secondary care, ondansetron was found to be effective at reducing vomiting. AIM: To determine the effectiveness of adding oral ondansetron to care as usual (CAU) to treat vomiting in children with AGE attending out-ofhours primary care (OOH-PC). DESIGN AND SETTING: A pragmatic randomised controlled trial at three OOH-PC centres in the north of the Netherlands (Groningen, Zwolle, and Assen), with a follow-up of 7 days. METHOD: Children were included if they were: aged 6 months-6 years; AGE diagnosed by a GP; >/=4 reported episodes of vomiting in the 24 hours before presentation; >/=1 reported episode of vomiting in the 4 hours before presentation; and written informed consent from both parents. Children were randomly allocated to either the control group or the intervention group. The control group received CAU, namely oral rehydration therapy. The intervention group received CAU plus one dose of oral ondansetron (0.1 mg/kg). RESULTS: In total, 194 children were included for randomisation. One dose of oral ondansetron decreased the proportion of children who continued vomiting within 4 hours from 42.9% to 19.5%, with an odds ratio of 0.37 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.20 to 0.72, number needed to treat: four). Ondansetron also decreased the number of vomiting episodes within 4 hours (incidence rate ratio 0.51 [95% CI = 0.29 to 0.88]) and improved overall parental satisfaction with treatment (P = 0.027). CONCLUSION: Children with AGE and increased risk of dehydration due to vomiting could be treated with ondansetron in primary care to stop vomiting more quickly and increase parental satisfaction with treatment. These results could be used to improve the quality and efficacy of general practice medicine.
INTRODUCTION: Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting are adverse effects responsible for worsening quality of life in cancer patients. To assess the efficacy, safety and effectiveness of serotonin receptor antagonist in cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, comparing ondansetron with granisetron, dolasetron, tropisetron and palonosetron. AREAS COVERED: Systematic review and meta-analysis. The data were collected using CINAHL; CENTRAL; MEDLINE/PubMed; and LILACS databases; grey literature; and manual search. The methodological quality was assessed using the modified Jadad scale; Cochrane Collaboration's tool for assessing risk of bias in randomized clinical trials and the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for observational studies. The search was completed in November, 2015. 26 studies were included in the meta-analysis. Ondansetron exhibited similar efficacy than granisetron and tropisetron, as well as greater efficacy than dolasetron for acute vomiting. Palonosetron exhibited greater efficacy than ondansetron for delayed nausea and acute and delayed vomiting. The comparison of granisetron with ondansetron in the cohort studies showed no difference. Expert commentary: In this review, palonosetron had increased efficiency compared with ondansetron, except in the subgroup analysis and acute nausea. Few cohort studies have been published addressing this topic.
INTRODUCTION: The aim of the study was to investigate the long-term stability of dexamethasone 10mg associated with alizapride 100mg or ondansetron 8mg in 100mL of 0.9% sodium chloride solution stored at 5+/-3 degrees C. METHOD: Solutions of 0.9% sodium chloride 100mL in polyolefin bags (n=5) containing approximately dexamethasone (DEX) 10mg associated with alizapride (ALI) 100mg or ondansetron (OND) 8mg were prepared under aseptic conditions and stored about 30 days at 5+/-3 degrees C. ALI, DEX and OND concentrations were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Optic density measurement at different wavelengths, pH measurement and optic microscope observations were performed periodically during the storage. A forced degradation test with HCL 5M and NaOH 5M before and after heating at 100 degrees C was also performed. Solutions were considered stable if the 95% one-sided lower confidence limit of the concentration remains superior to 90% of the initial concentration or 95% of the initial concentration when any signs of physical instability exist as recently recommend. RESULTS: The calibration was linear over the following range from 20 to 1.25mg/100mL for DEX, from 200 to 12.5mg/100mL for ALI and from 20 to 1.25mg/100mL for OND with a calculated correlation coefficient (r(2)) of 0.998, 0.999 and 0.999, respectively. The inter- and intra-assay precision was below 10% for both mixtures. All formulations were physically stable during the storage. The lower confidence limit of the concentration for these solutions remains superior to 90% of the initial concentration at this date as recommended by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) until 30 days. CONCLUSION: The HPLC method is specific and reproducible and can easily be adopted for monitoring the quality control in the production of DEX-ALI and DEX-OND bags. Solutions of DEX-ALI and DEX-OND were physically and chemically stable for 30 days in polyolefin bags stored at 5+/-3 degrees C and could therefore be prepared in advance.
