Orphenadrine (ORP), dimenhydrinate (DMN), and cinnarizine (CNN) were investigated using green-sensitive spectrofluorometric methods. Method, I used for determination of DMN in 0.1 M hydrochloric acid (HCl) and 1.0% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) at 286 nm after lambda(ex) 222 nm, while for determination of ORP in 1.0% w/v SDS involves measuring the fluorescence at 285 nm after lambda(ex) 220 nm. For DMN and ORP, the detection and quantitation limits were 2.99 and 4.71 and 9.08 and 14.29 ng/mL, respectively. The ranges of DMN and ORP were 0.10-1.0 and 0.04-0.5 microg/mL, respectively, in micellar aqueous solution. Method II, the derivative intensities of DMN and CNN were measured at a fixed of different wavelength between the excitation and the emission wavelengths (Deltalambda) = 60 nm at 282 and 322 nm, at the zero crossing of each other, respectively. The detection and quantitation limits for DMN and CNN were 1.77 and 0.88 ng/mL and 5.36 and 2.65 ng/mL, correspondingly, through the entire range of 0.1-1.0 microg/mL for DMN and CNN. The linearity was perfectly determined through the higher values of the correlation coefficient ranging from 0.9997 to 0.9999 for both direct and synchronous methods. The precision of the proposed methods was also confirmed via the lower values of the standard deviation which ranged from 0.39 to 1.11. The technique was expanded to analyze this mixture in combined tablets and laboratory-prepared mixtures. The method validation was done depending on the international conference on harmonization (ICH) recommendations. An analysis of the statistical data revealed a high agreement between the proposed data and the comparison methodology. Three different assessment methods demonstrated the greenness of the technique.
A trial involving patients receiving fluphenazine decanoate was designed to compare the effects of orphenadrine hydrochloride (Disipal) and its major metabolite, tofenacin hydrochloride (Elamol) on the Parkinsonian side-effects and depression occurring during fluphenazine decanoate therapy. The trial was a double-blind one, with crossover. It was found that both drugs exerted an adequate control on the Parkinsonian side-effects, but there was no significant difference between their effects. Ophenadrine, however, was shown to be significantly superior (p less than 0-05) in the control of the depressive side-effects.
The uptake, translocation, and metabolization of four widely used drugs, amitriptyline, orphenadrine, lidocaine, and tramadol, were investigated in a laboratory study. Cress (Lepidium sativum L.) and pea (Pisum sativum L.) were employed as model plants. These plants were grown in tap water containing the selected pharmaceuticals at concentrations ranging from 0.010 to 10 mg L(-1), whereby the latter concentration was employed for the (tentative) identification of drug-related metabolites formed within the plant. Thereby, mainly phase I metabolites were detected. Time-resolved uptake studies, with sampling after 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 days, revealed that all four pharmaceuticals were taken up by the roots and further relocated to plant stem and leaves. Also in these studies, the corresponding phase I metabolites could be detected, and their translocation from root to stem (pea only) and finally leaves could be investigated.
Three chromatographic methods were developed, optimized and validated for Paracetamol (PAR), Orphenadrine citrate (Or.cit) and Caffeine (CAF) determination in their mixture and in presence of PAR toxic impurity; P-aminophenol (PAP) in tablets. The first method is based on a thin layer chromatography combined with densitometry. Separation was achieved using silica gel 60 F254 TLC plates and dichloromethane:methanol:acetone:glacial acetic acid (9:1:0.5:0.3, v/v/v) as a developing system at 230 nm. The second method is based on high-performance liquid chromatography with diode array detection. The proposed compounds are separated on a reversed phase C18 analytical column using phosphate buffer (pH 9; 0.05 M) and methanol (80:20, v/v) at 1.2 mL/min. Linear regressions are obtained in the range of 1-500 mug/mL, 25-1000 mug/mL and 1-400 mug/mL for PAR, Or.cit and CAF, respectively. Quantification of the toxic PAP is carried out using LC-MS-MS by electrospray ionization in the positive mode using triple quadrupole mass spectrometry. The limit of quantification for PAP is 1 ng/mL. All methods are validated according to the ICH guidelines and successfully applied to determine PAR, Or.cit, CAF and PAP in pure powder and in combined tablets dosage form without interference from excipients.
Third molar extraction is a common procedure frequently accompanied by moderate or severe pain, and involves sufficient numbers of patients to make studies relatively easy to perform. The aim of the present study was to determine the efficacy and safety of the therapeutic combination of 10 mg piroxicam, 1 mg dexamethasone, 35 mg orphenadrine citrate, and 2.5 mg cyanocobalamin (Rheumazin) when compared with 20 mg piroxicam alone (Feldene) in mandibular third molar surgery. Eighty patients scheduled for removal of the third molar were included in this randomized and double-blind study. They received (vo) Rheumazin or Feldene 30 min after tooth extraction and once daily for 4 consecutive days. Pain was determined by a visual analogue scale and by the need for escape analgesia (paracetamol). Facial swelling was evaluated with a measuring tape and adverse effects and patient satisfaction were recorded. There was no statistically significant difference in facial swelling between Rheumazin and Feldene (control group). Both drugs were equally effective in the control of pain, with Rheumazin displaying less adverse effects than Feldene. Therefore, Rheumazin appears to provide a better risk/benefit ratio in the mandibular molar surgery. Since the side effects resulting from nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug administration are a severe limitation to the routine use of these drugs in clinical practice, our results suggest that Rheumazin can be a good choice for third molar removal treatment.
The interaction of orphenadrine hydrochloride (ORD) with the model protein, bovine serum albumin (BSA), was investigated using a variety of spectroscopic techniques such as steady-state fluorescence, ultraviolet-visible, Fourier transform infrared, 3-D spectroscopy, and electrochemical methods under physiological conditions. Stern-Volmer plots were used to calculate fluorescence quenching at various temperatures. The findings point to a static quenching mechanism between ORD and BSA. At various reaction times, the binding sites (n) and binding constants (K) of ORD to BSA were recorded. Thermodynamic parameters ∆H(0), ∆S(0) and ∆G(0) between ORD and BSA were calculated and reported. The average binding distance (r) between the donor (BSA) and acceptor (ORD) molecules was predicted using Forster's theory. Three-dimensional fluorescence spectra, Fourier transform infrared spectra, and synchronous fluorescence studies all supported the alternations in protein structure following the interaction with ORD. A displacement study using site probes such as warfarin, ibuprofen, and digitoxin confirmed ORD binding at Sudlow's site I of BSA. The effect of common metal ions such as Cu(2+), Ni(2+), Ca(2+), Co(2+), and Zn(2+) on binding constant values was investigated and reported.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: In US emergency departments (EDs), patients with low back pain are often treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and muscle relaxants. We compare functional outcomes among patients randomized to a 1-week course of naproxen+placebo versus naproxen+orphenadrine or naproxen+methocarbamol. METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, comparative effectiveness trial conducted in 2 urban EDs. Patients presenting with acute, nontraumatic, nonradicular low back pain were enrolled. The primary outcome was improvement on the Roland-Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ) between ED discharge and 1 week later. All patients were given 14 tablets of naproxen 500 mg, to be used twice a day, as needed for low back pain. Additionally, patients were randomized to receive a 1-week supply of orphenadrine 100 mg, to be used twice a day as needed, methocarbamol 750 mg, to be used as 1 or 2 tablets 3 times per day as needed, or placebo. All patients received a standardized 10-minute low back pain educational session before discharge. RESULTS: Two hundred forty patients were randomized. Baseline demographic characteristics were comparable. The mean RMDQ score of patients randomized to naproxen+placebo improved by 10.9 points (95% confidence interval [CI] 8.9 to 12.9). The mean RMDQ score of patients randomized to naproxen+orphenadrine improved by 9.4 points (95% CI 7.4 to 11.5). The mean RMDQ score of patients randomized to naproxen+methocarbamol improved by 8.1 points (95% CI 6.1 to 10.1). None of the between-group differences surpassed our threshold for clinical significance. Adverse events were reported by 17% (95% CI 10% to 28%) of placebo patients, 9% (95% CI 4% to 19%) of orphenadrine patients, and 19% (95% CI 11% to 29%) of methocarbamol patients. CONCLUSION: Among ED patients with acute, nontraumatic, nonradicular low back pain, combining naproxen with either orphenadrine or methocarbamol did not improve functional outcomes compared with naproxen+placebo.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the analgesic efficacy of Neodolpasse, a fixed-dose combination of orphenadrine and diclofenac, compared with those of its single active ingredients in a human pain model. METHODS: The study was designed as a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, four-period crossover study. Twenty-four healthy female and male subjects received single infusions of Neodolpasse, orphenadrine, diclofenac or saline solution over 60 minutes. Infusions were separated by a 1-week washout period. Neurogenic inflammation and hyperalgesia were induced by topical occlusive application of a 1% capsaicin solution for 30 minutes on defined skin areas on the back. The pain response to CO2 laser pulses applied to the capsaicin-pretreated skin was measured by event-related vertex EEG recordings. This allowed us to study the influence of a single infusion on the central P2- and peripheral N1-components of laser-induced somatosensory-evoked potentials (LSEP) as a measure of pain response. RESULTS: Although none of the active treatments had a significant effect on the peripheral N1-component, all active treatments reduced the P2-component of the LSEP, reflecting central/spinal analgesic (anti-hyperalgesic) effects. These effects were statistically significant for orphenadrine (p < 0.0001) and for the combination of orphenadrine and diclofenac (p < 0.0013). The single ingredient diclofenac reduced the P2-component by a value just below clinical relevance (p < 0.0848). CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated the efficacy of Neodolpasse in a human pain model. The observed effect was mainly caused by central mechanisms and was found to be superior for the fixed-dose combination of orphenadrine and diclofenac compared with the individual ingredients. Both components contributed to the effect of the combination in an additive fashion, which can be explained by the different molecular mechanisms of action of each drug.
A gas chromatographic and extraction method for the assay of orphenadrine in plasma and urine has been developed, in which diphenhydramine is used as the internal standard. The procedure involves extraction with isopentane and alkali flame ionization (nitrogen) detection. Orphenadrine N-oxide and N-dealkylated orphenadrine did not interfere with the analysis. Orphenadrine concentrations down to 1 ng/ml can be determined. Application in a pharmacokinetic/bioavailability study is reported.
A simple and rapid spectrophotometric methods have been estimated for the microdetermination of phenylephrine HCl (I) and orphenadrine citrate (II). The proposed methods are based on the formation of ion-pair complexes between the examined drugs with alizarine (Aliz), alizarine red S (ARS), alizarine yellow G (AYG) or quinalizarine (Qaliz), which can be measured at the optimum lambda(max). The optimization of the reaction conditions is investigated. Beer's law is obeyed in the concentration ranges 2-36 microgram ml(-1), whereas optimum concentration as adopted from Ringbom plots was 3.5-33 microgram ml(-1). The molar absorptivity, Sandell sensitivity, and detection limit are also calculated. The correlation coefficient was >/=0.9988 (n=6) with a relative standard deviation of </=1.7, for six determinations of 20 microgram ml(-1). The proposed methods are successfully applied to the determination of drugs I and II in their dosage forms using the standard addition technique.
The solid-state structure of (+-)-orphenadrine hydrochloride [(CH3)2NCH2CH2OCH(o-CH3C6H4)(Ph).HCl], a skeletal muscle relaxant drug, was determined by single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis. Orphenadrine hydrochloride gave crystals belonging to the monoclinic P2(1)/n space group, and at low temperature (92 K), the following parameters were found: a = 6.923 (4), b = 7.508 (5), c = 33.22 (3) A, V = 1720 (3) A3, Z = 4, R(F) = 0.109, and Rw(F) = 0.131. Data were collected from poor crystalline material because of the low volume of the needle-shaped crystals (0.025 x 0.025 x 0.15 mm3). A molecular mechanics model was calculated by using an input structure based on atomic coordinates of the crystallographically determined molecular structure. The resulting molecular mechanics model and the structure determined by X-ray crystallography have the same molecular conformation. Whereas both solid-state (+-)-orphenadrine hydrochloride and diphenhydramine hydrochloride [(CH3)2NCH2CH2OCH(Ph)2.HCl] have synclinal N-C-C-O and antiperiplanar NC-C-O-CAr2 torsion angles, the former has a helical arrangement for Ar2CH, as expected, and the phenyl rings in the latter are disposed in a nonhelical, "open-book" arrangement.
Four hundred patients with painful muscle spasm caused by five common musculoskeletal diseases were included in a double-blind controlled trial of chlormezanone, orphenadrine, orphenadrine/paracetomol and placebo. Patients were treated for one week and then asked for their subjective assessment of the treatment. Fifty-three per cent improved on placebo, 57 percent on chlormezanone, 66 percent on orphenadrine and 71 percent on orphenadrine/paracetamol. There was no significant difference between chlormezanone and placebo, but orphenadrine appeared to have a beneficial effect, presumably because of its muscle relaxant activity.
1 Two studies were carried out on acutely psychotic patients receiving chlorpromazine (100 mg) 8-hourly. 2 In the pilot study on five patients, plasma chlorpromazine concentrations fell over the course of 3 weeks of treatment and parallel changes were noted in the plasma half-life of antipyrine, salivation rate and handwriting length. 3 In the main study involving twelve patients treated for 15 weeks, the above findings were confirmed and were interpreted as indicating that chlorpromazine accelerated its own metabolism by inducing liver microsomal oxidising enzymes. No metabolites of chlorpromazine were detected in plasma. 4 The addition of phenobarbitone (50 mg) 8-hourly for 3 weeks, or orphenadrine (100 mg) 8-hourly for 3 weeks, resulted in a lowering of plasma chlorpromazine concentrations together with a further shortening of plasma antipyrine half-life. 5 Physiological effects of the additional treatments suggested that phenobarbitone lessens the effects of chlorpromazine by lowering body concentrations. However, orphenadrine acts more by virtue of its anticholinergic effects. 6 It was concluded that phenobarbitone and orphenadrine should not be prescribed routinely in patients receiving major tranquillisers. The need for the addition of orphenadrine should be assessed in each individual case.
The need for medication with anticholinergic antiparkinsonian drugs was examined in 118 schizophrenic patients under long-term neuroleptic treatment. It was found that 1) none of 18 patients under treatment with low mg potency neuroleptics (chlorprothixene, clozapine, and thioridazine) had any need for anticholinergics; 2) of 60 patients under treatment with short-acting high mg potency neuroleptics (perphenazine greater than 16 mg daily and haloperidol greater than 2 mg daily) nine patients (15%) required medication with anticholinergics, whereas 3) of 40 patients under treatment with long-acting (depot) neuroleptics, 17 (43%) had a need for anticholinergic medication; and 4) no patient factors predisposing to the need for continued antiparkinsonian treatment could be identified. In an additional double-blind cross-over study of 12 patients presenting persisting neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism, it was found that G 31.406 (a new potentially antiparkinsonian drug), compared with placebo, had an antiparkinsonian effect (P less than 0.01) as well as an antidepressant effect (P less than 0.05). G 31.406 resulted in an improvement in anxiety and schizophrenia-score in some patients. Compared with placebo, orphenadrine had a more questionable effect on parkinsonism (0.05 less than P less than 0.01) and no significant effect on mental symptoms. There were no significant differences between the effects of G 31.406 and orphenadrine.
With certain amounts of sodium tert-butoxide and tert-butanol as additives, catalytic amounts of an inexpensive and easy-to-handle copper source Cu(OAc)(2)⋅H(2)O, a commercially available and air-stable non-racemic dipyridylphosphine ligand, as well as the stoichiometric desirable hydride donor polymethylhydrosiloxane (PMHS), formed a versatile in situ catalyst system for the enantioselective reduction of a broad spectrum of prochiral diaryl and aryl heteroarylketones in air, in high yields and with good to excellent enantioselectivities (up to 96 %). In particular, the practical viability of this process was evinced by its successful applications in the asymmetric synthesis of optically enriched potent antihistaminic drugs orphenadrine and neobenodine.
