Oxaprozin, a propionic acid derivative, is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) with analgesic and antipyretic properties. Its spectrum of anti-inflammatory activity has been demonstrated in both in vitro and in vivo models.1 The majority of published clinical trials have focused on the use of oxaprozin (from Searle) in the treatment of osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Over the last years, extensive motivation has emerged towards the application of supercritical carbon dioxide (SCCO(2)) for particle engineering. SCCO(2) has great potential for application as a green and eco-friendly technique to reach small crystalline particles with narrow particle size distribution. In this paper, an artificial intelligence (AI) method has been used as an efficient and versatile tool to predict and consequently optimize the solubility of oxaprozin in SCCO(2) systems. Three learning methods, including multi-layer perceptron (MLP), Kriging or Gaussian process regression (GPR), and k-nearest neighbors (KNN) are selected to make models on the tiny dataset. The dataset includes 32 data points with two input parameters (temperature and pressure) and one output (solubility). The optimized models were tested with standard metrics. MLP, GPR, and KNN have error rates of 2.079 x 10(-8), 2.173 x 10(-9), and 1.372 x 10(-8), respectively, using MSE metrics. Additionally, in terms of R-squared, they have scores of 0.868, 0.997, and 0.999, respectively. The optimal inputs are the same as the maximum possible values and are paired with a solubility of 1.26 x 10(-3) as an output.
PURPOSE: In this study, oxaprozin, a long-acting nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, and naproxen sodium were compared in terms of their effects on edema, pain, and trismus after surgery for impacted mandibular third molars. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty healthy patients with bilaterally impacted mandibular third molars were included in this randomized, cross-over, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Patients were assigned randomly to 1 of 3 surgery groups and received postoperatively 1,200 mg oxaprozin, 550 mg naproxen sodium, or a placebo. Postoperative edema was measured with ultrasonography performed before and after surgery. Trismus was measured by comparison of preoperative and postoperative maximum interincisal mouth opening measurements by caliper. Pain was assessed by a visual analog scale (VAS) and by recording the number of rescue analgesic pills taken. RESULTS: After removal of impacted third molars, the patients administered oxaprozin and naproxen showed superior results over those given placebo in terms of pain parameters (P < .05), but these treatments had no statistically significant effect on facial swelling. Comparing the oxaprozin and naproxen groups, there were no differences in the mouth opening measurements, but naproxen showed a statistically superior effect over the placebo (P < .05). Although not statistically significant, oxaprozin showed a more pronounced effect in reducing trismus than did the placebo (P = .07). CONCLUSIONS: Administration of either oxaprozin or naproxen sodium during the postoperative period is effective and has similar effects in reducing pain but questionable benefit for the management of trismus. However, neither agent has clinical benefit in terms of reducing edema.
This multicenter, 6-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study compared the efficacy and safety of oxaprozin 1200 mg once daily with that of nabumetone 1000 mg once daily in patients with moderate-to-severe osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee. To be eligible, patients had to experience a flare of OA within 2 weeks of discontinuing their usual OA medication (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug or analgesic). Eligible patients were assessed at baseline and then randomized to receive oxaprozin (n = 109), nabumetone (n = 110), or placebo (n = 109). Efficacy assessments were performed at weeks 1, 2, 4, and 6. Primary efficacy variables included knee pain on weight bearing, knee pain on motion, and patient's and physician's global assessments of OA. Secondary efficacy variables included pain intensity, time to walk 50 feet, and duration of morning stiffness. Safety was evaluated by use of routine laboratory analyses; physical examination at screening, baseline, and week 6 (or study termination); assessment of symptoms at baseline and at each visit; and testing stools for occult blood at screening and between week 4 and the final visit. Adverse events were monitored throughout the study. Between-group differences in efficacy variables were evident by week 1. The mean change in improvement from baseline with oxaprozin compared with placebo was statistically significant in favor of oxaprozin at weeks 1, 2, 4, and 6 for all primary efficacy variables. The mean change in improvement from baseline with nabumetone compared with placebo, however, was statistically significant only at week 1 for knee pain on motion, patient's global assessment, and physician's global assessment. The mean change in improvement from baseline was statistically significant (P < or = 0.035) in favor of oxaprozin versus nabumetone at weeks 2 and 6 for all four primary efficacy variables and also at week 4 for knee pain on motion. The incidence of adverse clinical events between treatment groups was not statistically significant. However, nine oxaprozin-treated patients had asymptomatic liver enzyme elevations reported as adverse events. Four of these patients had reversible elevations of aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase greater than three times the upper limit of normal range (P < 0.05); two of these patients were taking other medications known to induce liver enzyme abnormalities. The study showed that oxaprozin 1200 mg once daily was statistically significantly more efficacious than nabumetone 1000 mg once daily for the treatment of patients with moderate-to-severe OA of the knee. Both drugs were clinically well tolerated.
The effect of the combined use of randomly methylated beta-cyclodextrin (RAMEB), chitosan (CS), and bile components (dehydrocholic (DHCA) or ursodeoxycholic (UDCA) acids and their sodium salts) on solubility and permeability through Caco-2 cells of oxaprozin (a very poorly water-soluble non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug) has been investigated. Addition of CS, bile acids, and their sodium salts increased the RAMEB solubilizing power of 4, 2, and 5 times, respectively. Drug-RAMEB-CS co-ground systems showed very higher dissolution rate than corresponding drug-RAMEB systems. Addition of bile components further improved drug dissolution rate. The CS presence enabled a significant increase in drug permeability through Caco-2 cells with respect to drug-RAMEB systems. Moreover, CS and NaDHC showed a synergistic enhancer effect, enabling a 1.4-fold permeability increase in comparison with systems without bile salt. However, unexpectedly, no significant differences were found between physical mixtures and co-ground products, indicating that drug permeation improvement was due to the intrinsic enhancer effect of the carriers and not to drug-carrier interactions brought about by co-grinding, as instead found in dissolution rate studies. The combined use of RAMEB, CS, and NaDHC could be exploited to develop effective oral dosage forms of oxaprozin, with increased drug solubility and permeability, and then improved bioavailability.
Oxaprozin, a new nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agent, was studied alone and in combination with aspirin for its effects on hemostasis and protein binding in 10 healthy adults. When both oxaprozin and aspirin were given separately for seven days and in combination for five days, both drugs prolonged bleeding time and inhibited collagen- and epinephrine-induced platelet aggregation to a similar degree. The effects of the combination of oxaprozin and aspirin were not additive. The data from the protein binding study showed that oxaprozin was more than 99 per cent bound to plasma proteins. Aspirin displaced oxaprozin from its binding sites. As a result, the rate of plasma clearance of oxaprozin significantly increased from 20 to 26 ml/min/kg (P less than 0.05), and the plasma half-life decreased from 45 to 40 hours. Platelet count and the humoral clotting mechanism were not affected by either drug alone or in combination. There was no clinical evidence of bleeding. One subject who received oxaprozin for 12 days and, in addition, aspirin for the last five days developed a rash that subsided after both drugs were discontinued; one subject treated with aspirin experienced tinnitus. These data suggest that oxaprozin, like aspirin and other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, should be used with caution when administered to patients who have suffered trauma, who undergo surgery, or who have known defects in hemostasis.
This study was conducted to compare the effect of etodolac, nabumetone, and oxaprozin use on gastrointestinal (GI) safety and associated costs based on insurance claims information from practice settings. Data were obtained from a national claims database (MarketScan) for the years 1992 to 1994. The claims data of interest were for patients with arthritis who had used etodolac, nabumetone, or oxaprozin exclusively during a 9-month follow-up period (ONLY groups), or these drugs plus (PLUS groups) the other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) ibuprofen, naproxen, diclofenac, sulindac, piroxicam, ketoprofen, or indomethacin. For each group, we obtained information on the use of inpatient and outpatient services for GI-related events and the associated costs. All GI admissions were classified as NSAID-induced or possibly NSAID-induced events based on International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9 CM) codes. All outpatient upper GI ulcers or bleeding episodes were also identified by specific ICD-9 CM code. There were no significant between-group demographic differences. The proportions of patients with NSAID-induced and possibly NSAID-induced GI admissions were 0.1% and 0.4% for the etodolac-ONLY, 0.3% and 1.0% for the nabumetone-ONLY, and 0.1% and 0.5% for the oxaprozin-ONLY groups, respectively (P > 0.05), and a similar pattern was observed among the PLUS groups. In outpatient settings, 3.9%, 4.2%, and 4.9% of the etodolac-, nabumetone-, and oxaprozin-ONLY patients, respectively (P > 0.05), and 6.0%, 5.3%, and 4.7% of the etodolac-, nabumetone-, and oxaprozin-PLUS patients, respectively, had at least one upper GI ulcer/bleeding claim (P > 0.05). The total health care costs for 9 months were approximately $3000 each for the etodolac-, nabumetone-, and oxaprozin-ONLY groups. Oxaprozin, nabumetone, and etodolac had similar GI-safety and associated-costs profiles based on information from practice settings. Also, in patients who used multiple NSAIDs, the groups did not differ in their GI-safety and cost profiles.
To evaluate the influence of indomethacin and oxaprozin on reproductive function in healthy young men, 34 volunteers with normal semen parameters were recruited. In a randomized double-blind design, 12 men were treated with placebo, 12 received 600 mg/day of oxaprozin and 10 took indomethacin 25 mg t.i.d. This treatment phase lasted for 14 days after which a follow-up period extended for another 10 weeks. Sperm counts, percentage of motile and normally formed sperm cells, sperm velocity, linearity, lateral head displacement and beat frequency were evaluated by computerized image analysis once before treatment and at weekly intervals during the rest of the study. Prostaglandin levels in seminal plasma were significantly reduced after 2 weeks of treatment and remained suppressed for at least 2 additional weeks. In spite of this long lasting impairment of physiologic prostaglandin concentrations, no changes in any of the measured parameters were detectable when compared with the placebo group. Basal levels of testosterone, estradiol, LH, FSH, TSH and prolactin were unchanged. The response of hypophyseal hormones to a combined GnRH/TRH test before, during and after the treatment also was not affected. Overall, no negative influence of indomethacin or oxaprozin treatment on male reproductive function could be found in healthy volunteers. Since the active treatment phase was only 14 days, one can only speculate about long term effects of the tested drugs on reproductive parameters in men.
This 6-week, multicenter, double-masked, placebo-controlled study compared the efficacy, tolerability, and safety of the recommended starting dose of oxaprozin (1200 mg/d) and a 1500-mg/d dose of nabumetone in the treatment of patients with moderate-to-severe osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee. A total of 347 patients with a mean age of 61.1 years were randomized to receive oxaprozin (116 patients), nabumetone (115 patients), or placebo (116 patients). Adults of either sex who were older than 18 years of age were eligible for entry into the study, if they had had OA of the knee for at least 6 months. Efficacy variables included knee pain on weight bearing, knee pain on motion, patients' and physicians' global assessments of OA, pain intensity as measured on a visual analog scale, and time to walk 50 feet as quickly as possible. Efficacy variables were assessed at baseline and at weeks 1, 2, 4, and 6. Between-group differences in efficacy variables were evident by week 1. Mean improvements were significantly greater with oxaprozin than with placebo for all efficacy variables at all time periods, except knee pain on motion at weeks 2 and 4 and time to walk 50 feet at weeks 1, 2, and 4. Mean improvements were significantly greater with nabumetone than with placebo for all efficacy variables at all time periods, except the following: knee pain on weight bearing at weeks 2, 4 and 6; knee pain on motion at weeks 2 and 4; patients' global assessment at week 4; and pain intensity as measured on a visual analog scale at weeks 2 and 4. There were, however, no significant differences between oxaprozin and nabumetone in any of these efficacy variables. Adverse events were reported by 83 (71.6%) patients who took oxaprozin, by 80 (69.6%) patients who took nabumetone, and by 57 (49.1%) patients who took placebo. Adverse events were reported for significantly more patients taking oxaprozin or nabumetone than placebo. However, adverse events tended to be mild or moderate and rarely resulted in patients withdrawing from the study. Combined with the results of an earlier study, the results of this study showed that a 1500-mg/d dose of nabumetone, which is higher than the recommended starting dose of 1000 mg/d, is required for efficacy equivalent to that of the recommended starting dose of oxaprozin, 1200 mg/d, in relieving the symptoms of OA. Thus nabumetone may require dosage titration from the recommended starting dose. Oxaprozin and nabumetone were found to have similar tolerability profiles, as shown by adverse-event monitoring and withdrawal rates, as well as clinically similar safety profiles, as demonstrated by physical examinations, hematologic and biochemical laboratory testing, hemoccult testing, and adverse-event monitoring and symptom assessment.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Data on file with the US FDA, and other published studies, suggest that the selective cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitor NSAID rofecoxib has a greater hypertensive adverse effect than other NSAIDs, including celecoxib. In this study we describe a pharmacoepidemiologic analysis of spontaneous adverse event reports of acute, clinically serious hypertension (as defined by hospitalisation) reported in association with rofecoxib, celecoxib, nabumetone and oxaprozin. The objective of this analysis is to assess whether postmarketing data are consistent with results of clinical trials. We also collapse cases into series for the identification of possible risk factors for clinically severe, NSAID-associated hypertension. METHODS: Domestic (US) cases of apparently unconfounded, acute hypertension leading to hospitalisation were collected and reviewed from the spontaneous adverse events database of the FDA for rofecoxib, celecoxib, nabumetone and oxaprozin for the initial 3 years of marketing. Drug use data for the same intervals enabled calculation of reporting rates. RESULTS: In an analysis of reporting rates, hospitalisation for acute blood pressure (BP) elevation was reported more frequently (3.8-fold) for rofecoxib compared with celecoxib. A total of 34 cases are collapsed into case series. No cases were identified for either nabumetone or oxaprozin. Inspection of reviewed cases for celecoxib and rofecoxib suggest that these patients (average age 72 years) were potentially high-risk candidates for NSAID therapy. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: During early marketing, hospitalisation for acute BP elevation appears to have been reported more frequently for rofecoxib compared with celecoxib. This is consistent with clinical trial data on file with the FDA, and other published studies that found rofecoxib to have a greater effect on BP than other NSAIDs, including celecoxib. This finding may be particularly relevant in older patients given the prevalence of hypertension and cardiovascular disease in this age group.
1. The first step in the interaction between oxaprozin glucuronide and human serum albumin (HSA) is formation of a reversible complex which then leads to the following reactions; (a) acyl migration of the aglycone from position 1 to positions 2, 3 and 4 of the glucuronic acid moiety; (b) hydrolysis of the glycosidic bond; and (c) covalent binding of oxaprozin to the HSA molecule. The isomers of oxaprozin glucuronide formed in (a) and the covalently bonded drug in (c) are also hydrolyzed to oxaprozin. 2. Oxaprozin and ligands known to bind at Site II as classified by Sudlow et al. (1976), also called the benzodiazepine binding site (Muller and Wollert 1975), inhibit these reactions with oxaprozin glucuronide, while ligands which are known to bind at other sites on HSA do not. 3. Modification of a single tyrosine residue, located within Site II, with tetranitromethane, diisopropylfluorophosphate, and p-nitrophenylacetate causes significant reduction of the covalent binding of oxaprozin to HSA. 4. Tetranitromethane modification of HSA decreases all three reactions, while not inhibiting the formation of the reversible complex, indicating that the tyrosine located in Site II (tyr-411)acts as the nucleophile in these reactions. 5. Chemical modification of lysine residues has only a small effect on the reactions while modification of the lone free sulphhydryl (cys) in HSA has no effect.
The nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug oxaprozin is extensively bound to plasma proteins in a concentration-dependent manner. This study demonstrates for the first time the inverse nonlinear pharmacokinetics of total and unbound oxaprozin and presents clinical implications of this phenomenon. A total of 71 healthy volunteers participated in single- and multiple-dose studies. In study I, 0.6-, 1.2-, and 1.8-gm doses of oxaprozin were given on an empty stomach in a randomized, crossover trial (n = 35). In studies II and III, 1.2- and 1.8-gm doses, respectively, were given once a day for 8 days (n = 12 and 24, respectively). Serial blood samples for total and unbound drug assays were taken over a 240-hour period in study I and for a 24-hour period on days 1, 5, and 8 in studies II and III. After administration of 1.2 gm once daily, steady-state conditions were established by day 5. Actual average steady-state plasma concentrations (Cavg) were lower than those predicted from the single-dose study based on linear kinetics for the total drug, but higher for the unbound drug. Nonlinear changes in Vd/F were also noted with multiple-dose administration. Vd/F increased by 47% for total drug but decreased by 61% for unbound drug relative to single-dose values. Half-lives after single-dose administration for total and unbound drug determined from 24 to 240 hours and from 24 to 72 hours, respectively, were dose independent for total drug, but dose dependent for unbound drug. Half-lives after multiple-dose administration measured from 24 to 48 hours in study II decreased further. In conclusion, oxaprozin clearance for the total drug was increased while that of the unbound drug was decreased after repetitive dosing. This inverse pharmacokinetic behavior has been attributed to the two noncompensatory kinetic effects: concentration-dependent protein binding and saturable metabolism of oxaprozin.
The binding of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug oxaprozin to human serum albumin was studied by bioaffinity high-performance liquid chromatography using a column based on immobilized human serum albumin. Displacement studies using marker compounds for the major drug binding sites showed that oxaprozin has a high affinity for the benzodiazepine/indole site and binds to the warfarin site but with a significantly lower affinity. Biochromatography and ultrafiltration techniques were used to screen for possible competition and allosteric interactions between oxaprozin and potential co-administered drugs including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antipyretics, hypoglycaemics, inhibitors of angiotensin-converting enzyme, anaesthetics, metal ions and anticancer agents. Competition occurred mainly with drugs bound at the benzodiazepine site (benzodiazepines, various non-steroidal anti-inflammatories).
The influence of l-arginine on the complexing and solubilizing power of randomly-methylated-beta-cyclodextrin (RamebetaCD) towards oxaprozin, a very poorly soluble anti-inflammatory drug, was examined. The interactions between the components were investigated both in solution, by phase-solubility analysis, and in the solid state, by differential scanning calorimetry, FTIR and X-ray powder diffractometry. The morphology of the solid products was examined by Scanning Electron Microscopy. Results of phase-solubility studies indicated that addition of arginine enhanced the RamebetaCD complexing and solubilizing power of about 3.0 and 4.5 times, respectively, in comparison with the binary complex (both at pH approximately 6.8). The effect of arginine was not simply additive, but synergistic, being the ternary system solubility higher than the sum of those of the respective drug-CD and drug-arginine binary systems. Solid equimolar ternary systems were prepared by physical mixing, co-grinding, coevaporation and kneading techniques, to explore the effect of the preparation method on the physicochemical properties of the final products. The ternary co-ground product exhibited a dramatic increase in both drug dissolution efficiency and percent dissolved at 60min, whose values (83.6 and 97.1, respectively) were about 3 times higher than the sum of those given by the respective drug-CD and drug-aminoacid binary systems. Therefore, the ternary co-ground system with arginine and RamebetaCD appears as a very valuable product for the development of new more effective delivery systems of oxaprozin, with improved safety and bioavailability.
The kinetics of a single 1200 mg oral dose of oxaprozin, a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agent of the propionic acid class, was studied in 22 healthy female volunteers aged 21 to 64 years. Eleven subjects had been taking a conjugated estrogen preparation for at least 3 months; the other 11 subjects served as control women who were not taking conjugated estrogens. Mean pharmacokinetic variables in control and conjugated estrogen groups were: volume of distribution, 15.1 vs 14.1 l; elimination half-life, 59.8 vs 54.2 h; clearance, 3.2 vs 3.1 ml/min; peak plasma concentration, 84.8 vs 90.7 micrograms/ml, respectively. None of the differences were significant. However, the time of peak concentration (8.9 vs 4.0 h) was significantly longer in the control group than in the conjugated estrogen group, respectively (p less than 0.05). Oxaprozin clearance, accomplished by a combination of oxidation and conjugation, is unimpaired by coadministration of conjugated estrogens.
