INTRODUCTION: Urinary incontinence (UI) is a prevalent condition among women of all ages. It can have a significant negative impact on women's quality of life causing not only physical but also psychological distress. AREAS COVERED: This article aims to provide a review of the pharmacology, efficacy, safety and tolerability of fesoterodine fumarate (the newest anticholinergic launched in the UK) and the oxybutynin vaginal ring (the newest route of drug delivery in development) in the treatment of urgency UI. EXPERT OPINION: Fesoterodine is now a well-established treatment option; however, as with all oral anticholinergic agents its use is hindered by side effects. The efficacy of the oxybutynin ring has only been demonstrated in small studies. Larger clinical trials assessing the efficacy, tolerability and acceptability are required before appropriate recommendations can be made.
Rationale: There is currently no effective pharmacological treatment for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Recent investigations indicate that drugs with noradrenergic and antimuscarinic effects improve genioglossus muscle activity and upper airway patency during sleep. Objectives: We aimed to determine the effects of the combination of a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (atomoxetine) and an antimuscarinic (oxybutynin) on OSA severity (apnea-hypopnea index [AHI]; primary outcome) and genioglossus responsiveness (secondary outcome) in people with OSA. Methods: A total of 20 people completed a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, crossover trial comparing 1 night of 80 mg atomoxetine plus 5 mg oxybutynin (ato-oxy) to placebo administered before sleep. The AHI and genioglossus muscle responsiveness to negative esophageal pressure swings were measured via in-laboratory polysomnography. In a subgroup of nine patients, the AHI was also measured when the drugs were administered separately. Measurements and Main Results: The participants' median (interquartile range) age was 53 (46-58) years and body mass index was 34.8 (30.0-40.2) kg/m(2). ato-oxy lowered AHI by 63% (34-86%), from 28.5 (10.9-51.6) events/h to 7.5 (2.4-18.6) events/h (P < 0.001). Of the 15/20 patients with OSA on placebo (AHI > 10 events/hr), AHI was lowered by 74% (62-88%) (P < 0.001) and all 15 patients exhibited a >/=50% reduction. Genioglossus responsiveness increased approximately threefold, from 2.2 (1.1-4.7)%/cm H(2)O on placebo to 6.3 (3.0 to 18.3)%/cm H(2)O on ato-oxy (P < 0.001). Neither atomoxetine nor oxybutynin reduced the AHI when administered separately. Conclusions: A combination of noradrenergic and antimuscarinic agents administered orally before bedtime on 1 night greatly reduced OSA severity. These findings open new possibilities for the pharmacologic treatment of OSA. Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02908529).
The concept of deuterium enrichment has gained more attention due to its advantages in the studies of clinical pharmacokinetics and metabolic profiles. In addition, it is cost and time efficient to develop deuterium-enriched drugs. Herein we built a combinatorial library of deuterated (S)-oxybutynins which all 8 D-compounds were characterized by MS, [Formula: see text] NMR and [Formula: see text]C NMR.
Pediatric neuropathic bladder dysfunction can cause irreversible renal damage and urinary incontinence. Etiologically, it is usually the consequence of a congenital neural tube defect. The majority of affected children can be successfully managed with the standard medical treatment of clean intermittent catheterization and anticholinergic (typically oxybutynin) medication. A subset of patients experience severe side effects or insufficient suppression of detrusor overactivity on oral oxybutynin. Intravesical instillations offer an effective alternative; this Review considers their indications, administration, safety and efficacy.
A double-blind study of the short-term effects of oxybutynin chloride versus placebo on bladder spasm after transurethral surgery was done in 106 male patients. No significant difference between the placebo and 10 mg. or 20 mg. of the drug was noted.
Hyperhidrosis is the excessive production of sweating, which can be primary and focal or secondary to various pathologies. The exact cause of primary focal hyperhidrosis is still unknown, although a genetic basis is recognized, and its prevalence varies from 1% to 2.8%. The most affected sites are the armpits, palms, soles and face. It causes much discomfort, affects the quality of life, and is estimated to be undervalued by health professionals. Many treatment options are proposed, both clinical and surgical. The aim of this review is to focus on the treatment of hyperhidrosis with oxybutynin, an anticholinergic drug originally used to control overactive bladder.
Hematohidrosis is a rare condition characterized by blood in the sweat. We report a case of hematohidrosis of the mid-face and hands in a 13-year-old girl who was treated successfully with oral oxybutynin and discuss the therapeutic rationale.
The results of a double-blind controlled trial using oxybutynin chloride in 30 patients are described. Twenty-three patients completed the study; 17 of these had symptomatic improvement and 9 patients had urodynamic improvement. Seventeen patients had significant side effects.
BACKGROUND: Sweating is a physiologic mechanism of human thermoregulation. Hyperhidrosis is defined as a somatic disorder where the sweating is exaggerated in an exact area because the sweat glands are hyperfunctioning. It negatively affects the quality of life of the patients. We aim to investigate patient satisfaction and the effectiveness of oxybutynin in treating hyperhidrosis. METHODS: We prospectively registered the protocol of this systematic review and meta-analysis on PROSPERO (CRD 42022342667). This systematic review and meta-analysis were reported according to the PRISMA statement guidelines. We searched three electronic databases (PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science) from inception until June 2, 2022, using MeSH terms. We include studies comparing patients with hyperhidrosis who received oxybutynin or a placebo. We assessed the risk of bias using the Cochrane risk of bias assessment tool (ROB2) for randomized controlled trials. The risk ratio was calculated for categorical variables, and the mean difference was calculated for continuous variables using the random effect model with 95% confidence intervals (CI). RESULTS: Six studies were included in the meta-analysis, with a total of 293 patients. In all studies, patients were assigned to receive either Oxybutynin or Placebo. Oxybutynin represented an HDSS improvement (RR = 1.68 95% CI [1.21, 2.33], p = 0.002). It also can improve the quality of life. There is no difference between oxybutynin and placebo regarding dry mouth (RR = 1.68 95% CI [1.21, 2.33], p = 0.002). CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that using oxybutynin as a treatment for hyperhidrosis is significant and needs to be highlighted for clinicians. However, more clinical trials are needed to grasp the optimum benefit.
CONTEXT: There is currently a broad therapeutic arsenal of drugs for treating overactive bladder syndrome (OAB). However, there is still a need for new compounds and for improving known drugs in terms of efficacy, compliance and tolerability. OBJECTIVE: To report the scientific evidence on the safety and efficacy of transdermal oxybutynin (OXY-TDS) for treating OAB. MATERIAL AND METHODS: A systematic review without time restrictions was conducted until May 2015 in the MEDLINE/PubMed database. We also performed a manual review of abstracts published in international urogynaecology congresses. RESULTS: The evaluated studies show that patients treated with OXY-TDS experience a significant reduction in urinary incontinence episodes compared with placebo, which is comparable to that observed in patients treated with oral oxybutynin or with tolterodine. In all of the studies, we observed improvements in symptoms from the second or third week of treatment and in a sustained manner until the end of treatment (6, 12 or 24 weeks). The clinical practice study also showed improved quality of life, achieving benefits in numerous patient profiles, with an efficacy independent of previous treatments. The safety of the drug was demonstrated in the various patient profiles. CONCLUSIONS: OXY-TDS represents an effective alternative for the symptomatic treatment of adult patients with OAB, which, thanks to its pharmacokinetic profile, better tolerability, different administration method and dosage, could represent an added value in treating special populations.
Sixty-three children with persistent nocturnal enuresis were urodynamically assessed and subsequently treated with oxybutynin chloride. Urodynamic evaluation, including graduation of detrusor instability and comparison of maximum bladder capacity with the age-predicted norm, confirmed an inadequate storage function in 84% of the children. Treatment benefit totaling 70% was dependent upon urodynamic findings, with best relation to the determined bladder capacity. The value attributed to graduation of uninhibited contractions was prognostic in accordance with further subdivision of the maximum bladder capacity. Treatment benefit was limited in children with normal urodynamic findings.
Anticholinergic medications have long been a mainstay of overactive bladder (OAB) treatment. Oxybutynin, a first-generation anticholinergic, still accounts for more than half of all OAB medication prescriptions, despite associations with impaired memory and cognition, as well as mounting evidence that it may increase the risk of incident dementia. This review details the current literature regarding oxybutynin and cognition, including evidence from preclinical, clinical, and real-world studies that show that oxybutynin binds nonspecifically to muscarinic receptors in the brain and is associated with adverse cognitive outcomes. We also discuss society recommendations to reduce use of oxybutynin and other anticholinergics to treat OAB.
Rationale: The combination of noradrenergic and antimuscarinic agents has recently been shown to improve upper-airway function and reduce obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) severity in short-term (⩽1 wk) proof-of-concept studies. Objectives: To determine the safety, tolerability, and potential efficacy of longer term use of different doses of the noradrenergic agent atomoxetine combined with the antimuscarinic oxybutynin (ato-oxy). Methods: Thirty-nine people with predominantly severe OSA received 80/5 mg ato-oxy, 40/5 mg ato-oxy, 40/2.5 mg ato-oxy, or placebo nightly for 30 days in a double-blind, randomized, parallel design. Participants completed three in-laboratory sleep studies (baseline, Night 1, and Night 30) to assess efficacy. Vital signs and objective measures of alertness and memory were assessed. In men, potential effects on prostate function were assessed using the International Prostate Symptom Score at baseline and Night 30. Potential adverse events were assessed during in-laboratory visits and via weekly phone calls. Results: Side effects were generally mild and consistent with known side-effect profiles of each individual drug (i.e., dose-dependent increases in dry mouth with oxybutynin). Heart rate increased by Night 30 in two active drug arms (mean +/- standard deviation 8 +/- 10 beats/min [P = 0.01] with 80/5 mg and 9 +/- 14 beats/min [P = 0.02] with 40/2.5 mg vs. placebo). No clinically relevant changes in blood pressure, International Prostate Symptom Score, and measures of alertness and memory were observed between conditions. Apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) with 4% oxygen desaturation and hypoxic burden decreased by  approximately 50% with 80/5 mg ato-oxy from baseline but not versus placebo (e.g., AHI with 3% oxygen desaturation and AHI with 4% oxygen desaturation difference at Night 30 was -8.2 [95% confidence interval, -22.5 to 6.2] and -8.5 [95% confidence interval, -18.3 to 1.3] events/h, respectively). Conclusions: One month of nightly noradrenergic and antimuscarinic combination therapy was generally well tolerated, with a side-effect profile consistent with each agent alone, and was associated with an  approximately 50% reduction from baseline in a key OSA severity metric, the hypoxic burden with the highest dose combination. These findings highlight the potential to target noradrenergic and antimuscarinic mechanisms for OSA pharmacotherapy development. Clinical trial registered with www.anzctr.org.au (ACTRN 12619001153101).
The transdermal delivery system (TDS) of oxybutynin (OXY) is widely used for the treatment of overactive bladder patients. This report aimed to assess the effect of external heating on the pharmacokinetics of OXY after transdermal administration. Franz-type diffusion cell experiments at room temperature, 36 and 45 degrees C were performed to estimate the permeations of OXY through human epidermal membrane with an isosorbide dinitrate (ISDN) formulation as a reference. The fluxes of OXY at 36 and 45 degrees C were only approximately 1.2-fold higher than that at room temperature, while those of ISDN with heating were more than 2.5 times as high as that without heating (p<0.001). These results indicate that the influence of heating on the permeation of OXY from the TDS of OXY may be minimal.
Oxybutynin (OXY) is the most common drug to treat overactive bladder (OAB) syndrome. Transdermal administration is a more ideal route replacing oral administration to resolve problems of low bioavailability and severe side effects. However, commercial transdermal products of OXY frequently cause skin irritation and low permeation efficiency arising discontinued medication. Here, oxybutynin nanosuspension (OXY-NS) and its gel preparation (OXY-NG) were constructed to resolve these issues. In vitro permeation test and in vivo pharmacokinetics study confirmed that OXY-NG significantly enhanced the transdermal permeation of OXY, about 4-fold and 3-fold higher than oxybutynin coarse suspension (OXY-CG), respectively, and in vitro retention test certified that OXY-NG increased OXY concentration especially in viable epidermis (VE) and Dermis (about 3 times that of OXY-CG), consequently improving the bioavailability. Skin irritation assay demonstrated that OXY-NG would not trigger skin adverse effects. In addition, selectively blocking hair follicles test evidenced that hair follicles pathway played an important role in OXY-NS transdermal delivery. In general, by virtue of excellent drug loading, low toxicity and ease of scale-up, OXY-NG is a promising strategy to ameliorate skin permeation of insoluble OXY for better transdermal treatment for OAB, hence increasing its bioavailability, reducing adverse effects, and achieving good patient compliance.
We reviewed Food and Drug Administration postmarketing reports of central nervous system (CNS) anticholinergic effects in association with oxybutynin. Taking domestic usage by age group into account, there is a disproportionately higher number of CNS adverse event cases reported in pediatric patients as compared with adult patients. CNS stimulation was prominent in the pediatric cases.
STUDY OBJECTIVES: Children with Down syndrome (DS) are at very high risk for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Current OSA treatments have limited effectiveness in this population. We evaluated the effectiveness of atomoxetine and oxybutynin (ato-oxy) to treat OSA in children with Down syndrome. METHODS: Children ages 6-7 years old with Down syndrome and OSA participated in a double-blind crossover clinical trial evaluating two dose regimens of ato-oxy. Participants received low-dose ato-oxy (0.5 mg/kg atomoxetine and 5 mg oxybutynin) and high-dose ato-oxy (1.2 mg/kg atomoxetine and 5 mg oxybutynin) for 1 month in random order. The primary study outcome was change in obstructive apnea-hypopnea index. Health-related quality of life as measured by the OSA-18 as well as changes in sleep architecture were secondary outcomes. RESULTS: Fifteen participants qualified for randomization and 11 participants had complete data at all points. Baseline obstructive apnea-hypopnea index was 7.4 +/- 3.7 (mean +/- standard deviation), obstructive apnea-hypopnea index with low-dose ato-oxy was 3.6 +/- 3.3 (P = .001 vs baseline), and obstructive apnea-hypopnea index with high-dose ato-oxy was 3.9 +/- 2.8 (P = .003 vs baseline). No significant sleep architecture differences were present with ato-oxy. No significant difference in OSA-18 score was present. OSA-18 total score was 51 +/- 19 at baseline, 45 +/- 17 (P = .09) at the end of 4 weeks of low-dose ato-oxy, and 45 +/- 16 (P = .37) at the end of high-dose ato-oxy therapy. The most common adverse effects were irritability and fatigue, and these were generally mild. CONCLUSIONS: Ato-oxy is a promising treatment for OSA in children with Down syndrome. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Registry: Clinicaltrials.gov; Name: Medications for Obstructive Sleep Apnea In Children With Down Syndrome (MOSAIC); URL: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04115878; Identifier: NCT04115878. CITATION: Combs D, Edgin J, Hsu C-H, et al. The combination of atomoxetine and oxybutynin for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea in children with Down syndrome. J Clin Sleep Med. 2023;19(12):2065-2073.
Oxybutynin (Ditropan), a widely distributed muscarinic antagonist for treating the overactive bladder, has been awaiting a definitive crystal structure for  approximately 50 years due to the sample and technique limitations. Past reports used powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) to shed light on the possible packing of the molecule however their model showed some inconsistencies when compared with the 2D chemical structure. These are largely attributed to X-ray-induced photoreduction. Here microcrystal electron diffraction (MicroED) is used to successfully unveil the experimental 3D structure of oxybutynin hydrochloride showing marked improvement over the reported PXRD structure. Using the improved model, molecular docking is applied to investigate the binding mechanism between M(3) muscarinic receptor (M(3)R) and (R)-oxybutynin, revealing essential contacts/residues and conformational changes within the protein pocket. A possible universal conformation is proposed for M(3)R antagonists, which is valuable for future drug development and optimization. This study underscores the immense potential of MicroED as a complementary technique for elucidating unknown pharmaceutical structures, as well as for protein-drug interactions.
