OBJECTIVE: Atrial fibrillation (AF) may be triggered by intravenous bisphosphonates (IVBPs) such as zoledronic acid or pamidronic acid. Our objective was to confirm the association between AF and IVBPs in a real-life large pharmacovigilance database. DESIGN: A systematic analysis of VigiBase, the World Health Organization's pharmacovigilance database. METHODS: Analysis of adverse events reported as 'atrial fibrillation' (according to the Medical Dictionary for Drug Regulatory Activities) associated with the use of zoledronic acid or pamidronic acid, in VigiBase, the World Health Organization's global Individual Case Safety Report (ICSR) database. All ICSRs reporting AF associated with zoledronic acid or pamidronic acid were included in a disproportionality analysis determining the lower end of the 95% credibility interval for the information component (IC025), showing a statistical association when >0. RESULTS: 530 ICSRs reporting on the association between AF and IVBPs were extracted. Bayesian disproportionality analysis detected a significant association between AF and use of zoledronic acid (IC025 = 1.83) and pamidronic acid (IC025 = 2.16). Further analysis of these ICSRs determined that AF was severe in 85.0% of cases and with a mortality of 17.7%. The risk of severe AF was increased (OR: 2.98 (95% CI: 1.17-7.57), P = 0.02) following zoledronic acid vs pamidronic acid, after adjustment for age and gender. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first VigiBase pharmacoepidemiological study confirming the association between IVBPs and AF. Most AF were severe, with a high frequency of lethal outcome. The risk of severe AF was increased following zoledronic acid use compared to pamidronic acid, advocating for a cautious use of IVBPs.
[(18)F]sodium fluoride ([(18)F]NaF) is recognised to be superior to [(99)mTc]-methyl diphosphate ([(99m)Tc]Tc-MDP) and 2-deoxy-2-[(18)F]fluoro-D-glucose ([(18)F]FDG) in bone imaging. However, there is concern that [(18)F]NaF uptake is not cancer-specific, leading to a higher number of false-positive interpretations. Therefore, in this work, [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-pamidronic acid was prepared, optimised, and tested for its in vitro uptake. NOTA-pamidronic acid was prepared by an N-Hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester strategy and validated by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS). Radiolabeling of [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-pamidronic acid was optimised, and it was ensured that all quality control analysis requirements for the radiopharmaceuticals were met prior to the in vitro cell uptake studies. NOTA-pamidronic acid was successfully prepared and radiolabeled with (18)F. The radiolabel was prepared in a 1:1 molar ratio of aluminium chloride (AlCl(3)) to NOTA-pamidronic acid and heated at 100  degrees C for 15 min in the presence of 50% ethanol (v/v), which proved to be optimal. The preliminary in vitro results of the binding of the hydroxyapatite showed that [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-pamidronic acid was as sensitive as [(18)F]sodium fluoride ([(18)F]NaF). Normal human osteoblast cell lines (hFOB 1.19) and human osteosarcoma cell lines (Saos-2) were used for the in vitro cellular uptake studies. It was found that [(18)F]NaF was higher in both cell lines, but [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-pamidronic acid showed promising cellular uptake in Saos-2. The preliminary results suggest that further preclinical studies of [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-pamidronic acid are needed before it is transferred to clinical research.
Three patients aged between 31 and 59 were treated with pamidronic acid (APD) due to severe hypercalcemia caused by parathyroid carcinoma. APD was given in 250 cm3 intravenous saline over a 2 h period in a dose of 0.45 to 0.50 mg/kg per day. Two patients received 6 and the other 9 infusions. Mean serum calcium diminished from 15.7 +/- 1.3 mg/dl to 11.7 +/- 0.6 mg/dl (p less than 0.05). Mean serum ionized calcium decreased from 8.1 mg/dl to 5.5 mg/dl, urinary calcium excretion from 478 mg/24 h to 229 mg/24 h and hydroxyproline from 204 mg/24 h to 117 mg/24 h. Serum calcium returned to pretreatment levels after 5 and 15 days post intravenous APD in two patients. In the third patient treated with 900 mg/day of oral APD, after the intravenous therapy the relapse occurred during the fourth month. The three patients received a second course of intravenous (iv) APD. The effect upon serum calcium (14.6 +/- 1.1 mg/dl to 11.8 +/- 0.6 mg/dl, p less than 0.05) was similar to the one obtained with the first course. Intravenous APD administration appears to be an effective and safe treatment of the severe hypercalcemia due to parathyroid carcinoma. To sustain levels of serum calcium attained in patients with non resectable tumors, a suitable program of iv APD pulses should be established.
BACKGROUND: In patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), second-line chemotherapy induces response rates of less than 20% and median survival times between 5 and 8 months. CASE REPORT: In the case described here, a patient with metastatic NSCLC responded with complete remission of the primary tumor and the involved lymph nodes as well as partial remission of bone metastases to a second-line chemotherapy with docetaxel and carboplatin. Since April 2003 (33 months), no tumor progression has been observed. Until present, the patient received monthly infusions of pamidronic acid. CONCLUSION: Our case report indicates that in certain patients with metastatic NSCLC who did not respond to first-line regimens, second-line chemotherapy can induce outstanding tumor response and significantly improve survival. It also indicates that the role of bisphosphonates in the treatment of NSCLC should be further investigated in large clinical trials.
Continuous oral pamidronate (APD), 1000 mg/day, was administered to 14 patients with rheumatoid arthritis. A control group of 13 patients with similar conditions received placebo under a double blind randomized study design. Periarticular erosion scores were significantly higher in the control group after 12 months treatment. This was attributed to a deterioration in this group rather than to an improvement in the APD treated one. By contrast, intraarticular narrowing score was not influenced by APD. Tolerance to oral APD was acceptable in all patients.
