In therapeutic doses paracetamol is a safe analgesic, but in overdosage it can cause severe hepatic necrosis. Following oral administration it is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, its systemic bioavailability being dose-dependent and ranging from 70 to 90%. Its rate of oral absorption is predominantly dependent on the rate of gastric emptying, being delayed by food, propantheline, pethidine and diamorphine and enhanced by metoclopramide. Paracetamol is also well absorbed from the rectum. It distributes rapidly and evenly throughout most tissues and fluids and has a volume of distribution of approximately 0.9L/kg. 10 to 20% of the drug is bound to red blood cells. Paracetamol is extensively metabolised (predominantly in the liver), the major metabolites being the sulphate and glucuronide conjugates. A minor fraction of drug is converted to a highly reactive alkylating metabolite which is inactivated with reduced glutathione and excreted in the urine as cysteine and mercapturic acid conjugates. Large doses of paracetamol (overdoses) cause acute hepatic necrosis as a result of depletion of glutathione and of binding of the excess reactive metabolite to vital cell constituents. This damage can be prevented by the early administration of sulfhydryl compounds such as methionine and N-acetylcysteine. In healthy subjects 85 to 95% of a therapeutic dose is excreted in the urine within 24 hours with about 4, 55, 30, 4 and 4% appearing as unchanged paracetamol and its glucuronide, sulphate, mercapturic acid and cysteine conjugates, respectively. The plasma half-life in such subjects ranges from 1.9 to 2.5 hours and the total body clearance from 4.5 to 5.5 ml/kg/min. Age has little effect on the plasma half-life, which is shortened in patients taking anticonvulsants. The plasma half-life is usually normal in patients with mild chronic liver disease, but its prolonged in those with decompensated liver disease.
BACKGROUND: Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is the most widely used non-prescription analgesic in the world. Paracetamol is commonly taken in overdose either deliberately or unintentionally. In high-income countries, paracetamol toxicity is a common cause of acute liver injury. There are various interventions to treat paracetamol poisoning, depending on the clinical status of the person. These interventions include inhibiting the absorption of paracetamol from the gastrointestinal tract (decontamination), removal of paracetamol from the vascular system, and antidotes to prevent the formation of, or to detoxify, metabolites. OBJECTIVES: To assess the benefits and harms of interventions for paracetamol overdosage irrespective of the cause of the overdose. SEARCH METHODS: We searched The Cochrane Hepato-Biliary Group Controlled Trials Register (January 2017), CENTRAL (2016, Issue 11), MEDLINE (1946 to January 2017), Embase (1974 to January 2017), and Science Citation Index Expanded (1900 to January 2017). We also searched the World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform and ClinicalTrials.gov database (US National Institute of Health) for any ongoing or completed trials (January 2017). We examined the reference lists of relevant papers identified by the search and other published reviews. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised clinical trials assessing benefits and harms of interventions in people who have ingested a paracetamol overdose. The interventions could have been gastric lavage, ipecacuanha, or activated charcoal, or various extracorporeal treatments, or antidotes. The interventions could have been compared with placebo, no intervention, or to each other in differing regimens. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted data from the included trials. We used fixed-effect and random-effects Peto odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) for analysis of the review outcomes. We used the Cochrane 'Risk of bias' tool to assess the risks of bias (i.e. systematic errors leading to overestimation of benefits and underestimation of harms). We used Trial Sequential Analysis to control risks of random errors (i.e. play of chance) and GRADE to assess the quality of the evidence and constructed 'Summary of findings' tables using GRADE software. MAIN RESULTS: We identified 11 randomised clinical trials (of which one acetylcysteine trial was abandoned due to low numbers recruited), assessing several different interventions in 700 participants. The variety of interventions studied included decontamination, extracorporeal measures, and antidotes to detoxify paracetamol's toxic metabolite; which included methionine, cysteamine, dimercaprol, or acetylcysteine. There were no randomised clinical trials of agents that inhibit cytochrome P-450 to decrease the activation of the toxic metabolite N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine.Of the 11 trials, only two had two common outcomes, and hence, we could only meta-analyse two comparisons. Each of the remaining comparisons included outcome data from one trial only and hence their results are presented as described in the trials. All trial analyses lack power to access efficacy. Furthermore, all the trials were at high risk of bias. Accordingly, the quality of evidence was low or very low for all comparisons. Interventions that prevent absorption, such as gastric lavage, ipecacuanha, or activated charcoal were compared with placebo or no intervention and with each other in one four-armed randomised clinical trial involving 60 participants with an uncertain randomisation procedure and hence very low quality. The trial presented results on lowering plasma paracetamol levels. Activated charcoal seemed to reduce the absorption of paracetamol, but the clinical benefits were unclear. Activated charcoal seemed to have the best risk:benefit ratio among gastric lavage, ipecacuanha, or supportive treatment if given within four hours of ingestion. There seemed to be no difference between gastric lavage and ipecacuanha, but gastric lavage and ipecacuanha seemed more effective than no treatment (very low quality of evidence). Extracorporeal interventions included charcoal haemoperfusion compared with conventional treatment (supportive care including gastric lavage, intravenous fluids, and fresh frozen plasma) in one trial with 16 participants. The mean cumulative amount of paracetamol removed was 1.4 g. One participant from the haemoperfusion group who had ingested 135 g of paracetamol, died. There were no deaths in the conventional treatment group. Accordingly, we found no benefit of charcoal haemoperfusion (very low quality of evidence). Acetylcysteine appeared superior to placebo and had fewer adverse effects when compared with dimercaprol or cysteamine. Acetylcysteine superiority to methionine was unproven. One small trial (low quality evidence) found that acetylcysteine may reduce mortality in people with fulminant hepatic failure (Peto OR 0.29, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.94). The most recent randomised clinical trials studied different acetylcysteine regimens, with the primary outcome being adverse events. It was unclear which acetylcysteine treatment protocol offered the best efficacy, as most trials were underpowered to look at this outcome. One trial showed that a modified 12-hour acetylcysteine regimen with a two-hour acetylcysteine 100 mg/kg bodyweight loading dose was associated with significantly fewer adverse reactions compared with the traditional three-bag 20.25-hour regimen (low quality of evidence). All Trial Sequential Analyses showed lack of sufficient power. Children were not included in the majority of trials. Hence, the evidence pertains only to adults. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: These results highlight the paucity of randomised clinical trials comparing different interventions for paracetamol overdose and their routes of administration and the low or very low level quality of the evidence that is available. Evidence from a single trial found activated charcoal seemed the best choice to reduce absorption of paracetamol. Acetylcysteine should be given to people at risk of toxicity including people presenting with liver failure. Further randomised clinical trials with low risk of bias and adequate number of participants are required to determine which regimen results in the fewest adverse effects with the best efficacy. Current management of paracetamol poisoning worldwide involves the administration of intravenous or oral acetylcysteine which is based mainly on observational studies. Results from these observational studies indicate that treatment with acetylcysteine seems to result in a decrease in morbidity and mortality, However, further evidence from randomised clinical trials comparing different treatments are needed.
Therapeutic Reviews aim to provide essential independent information for health professionals about drugs used in palliative and hospice care. Additional content is available on www.palliativedrugs.com. Country-specific books (Hospice and Palliative Care Formulary USA, and Palliative Care Formulary, British and Canadian editions) are also available and can be ordered from www.palliativedrugs.com. The series editors welcome feedback on the articles (hq@palliativedrugs.com).
A series of clean-up columns for solid-phase extraction (SPE) were packed with various C18 phases of different physico-chemical surface properties. These SPE columns were used for the isolation and determination of paracetamol and its metabolites from biological samples. The packing with a monomeric structure of chemically bonded phase showed the best recovery of tested substances in urine.
A large number of drugs are introduced each year to treat different diseases. Most of the time, patients suffer from more than one health problem which makes it necessary to take multiple drugs. When drugs are combined, the problem of drug-drug interaction becomes relevant. In this work, we studied the drug-drug interaction between escitalopram and ibuprofen or paracetamol using density functional theory and quantum theory of atoms in molecules. The results suggest that following the interactions, the activity of drugs changes according to site of interaction. Most reactive and most stable interactions would be preferable for the purpose of use. The in silico drug-likeness studies show that escitalopram and paracetamol couple is more bioavailable than escitalopram and ibuprofen couple. Moreover, in order to gain additional insights into the mentioned drugs' interactions, the drugs were docked separately and jointly against the potential targets for antidepressants and NSAIDs, namely 6HIS and 2PXX. The molecular docking results showed a potential improvement of the effectiveness of the drugs after combining by forming hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic contacts and pi...pi stacking.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.
BACKGROUND: We have reviewed the analgesic efficacies of rectal and parenteral paracetamol and tested the evidence for a possible additive analgesic effect of the combination of paracetamol with a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) in postoperative pain. METHODS: Randomized controlled trials were evaluated. Outcome measures were pain scores and demand for supplementary analgesia. RESULTS: Eight studies compared rectal paracetamol with placebo. One study of single-dose administration of rectal paracetamol 40-60 mg kg(-1) and three studies of repeat dosing with 14-20 mg kg(-1) showed significant analgesic efficacy, while studies of a single dose of 10-20 mg kg(-1) were negative. Ten studies compared parenteral paracetamol with placebo and eight studies showed improved pain relief with paracetamol. Of the nine studies comparing paracetamol with a combination of paracetamol and an NSAID, six studies showed improved pain relief for the combination while only two of the six studies comparing an NSAID with a combination of an NSAID and paracetamol showed improved pain relief for the combination. CONCLUSIONS: Considering the few studies available, evidence was found of a clinically relevant analgesic effect of rectal and parenteral paracetamol. Concurrent use of paracetamol and an NSAID was superior to paracetamol alone but no evidence was found of superior analgesic effect of the combination compared with the NSAID alone.
A newspaper article led this general practitioner and his patient to search for evidence and reach a decision on treatment
AIM: A recent report on intravenous (i.v.) paracetamol pharmacokinetics (PK) showed a higher total clearance in women at delivery compared with non-pregnant women. To describe the paracetamol metabolic and elimination routes involved in this increase in clearance, we performed a population PK analysis in women at delivery and post-partum in which the different pathways were considered. METHODS: Population PK parameters using non-linear mixed effect modelling were estimated in a two-period PK study in women to whom i.v. paracetamol (2 g loading dose followed by 1 g every 6 h up to 24 h) was administered immediately following Caesarean delivery and in a subgroup of the same women to whom single 2 g i.v.loading dose was administered 10-15 weeks post-partum. RESULTS: Population PK analysis was performed based on 255 plasma and 71 urine samples collected in 39 women at delivery and in eight of these 39 women 12 weeks post-partum. Total clearance was higher in women at delivery compared with 12th post-partum week (21.1 vs. 11.7 l h(-)(1)) due to higher clearances to paracetamol glucuronide (11.6 vs. 4.76 l h(-)(1)), to oxidative metabolites (4.95 vs. 2.77 l h(-)(1)) and of unchanged paracetamol (1.15 vs. 0.75 l h(-)(1)). In contrast, there was no difference in clearance to paracetamol sulphate. CONCLUSION: The increased total paracetamol clearance at delivery is caused by a disproportional increase in glucuronidation clearance and a proportional increase in clearance of unchanged paracetamol and in oxidation clearance, of which the latter may potentially limit further dose increase in this patient group.
Acetaminophen/paracetamol is the most widely used drug of the world. At the same time, it is probably one of the most dangerous compounds in medical use, causing hundreds of deaths in all industrialized countries due to acute liver failure (ALF). Publications of the last 130 years found in the usual databases were analyzed. Personal contacts existed to renowned researchers having contributed to the medical use of paracetamol and its precursors as H.U. Zollinger, S. Moeschlin, U. Dubach, J. Axelrod and others. Further information is found in earlier reviews by Eichengrun, Rodnan and Benedek, Sneader, Brune; comp. references. The history of the discovery of paracetamol starts with an error (active against worms), continues with a false assumption (paracetamol is safer than phenacetin), describes the first side-effect 'epidemy' (phenacetin nephropathy, drug-induced interstitial nephritis) and ends with the discovery of second-generation problems due to the unavoidable production of a highly toxic metabolite of paracetamol N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI) that may cause not only ALF and kidney damage but also impaired development of the fetus and the newborn child. It appears timely to reassess the risk/benefit ratio of this compound.
CONTEXT: Serum paracetamol-protein adducts (PPAs) are a novel potential biomarker of paracetamol exposure. The relationship between serum PPA concentrations and reported paracetamol use in ambulatory adults has not been previously described. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study of ambulatory adults. A detailed medication history was obtained from all subjects and subjects were stratified by reported paracetamol use in the 2 weeks prior to enrolment. Serum PPAs were measured in all subjects and correlated with reported dose, time of last ingestion and demographics. RESULTS: We enrolled 230 in the paracetamol exposure arm and 74 in the no exposure arm. 98/230 (42.6%)of subjects who reported paracetamol exposure had PPA detected and 68/74 (91.9%) of subjects who denied paracetamol exposure had no PPA detected. PPA concentrations were positively correlated with total paracetamol dose and with more recent ingestion. DISCUSSION: Detection of serum PPA generally reflects paracetamol exposure histories in ambulatory adults. Concentrations are well correlated with reported dose and time from last dose. CONCLUSIONS: Serum PPA can be detected with reported therapeutic use of paracetamol but may not be detected in all patients who report taking paracetamol.
OBJECTIVES: Effective postoperative pain management after lumbar disc surgery reduces complications and improves postoperative care. The purpose of this prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study is to evaluate the effects of IV paracetamol and ibuprofen on postoperative pain, morphine consumption and side effects of morphine in patients who underwent lumbar disc surgery. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventy-five patients aged 18-85 years scheduled for lumbar disk surgery with a single level laminectomy included in this study. All patients received morphine with an IV patient-controlled analgesia device during the first postoperative 24hour. The patients were divided randomly and double-blinded into three groups (control, paracetamol and ibuprofen). The demographic characteristics and procedure data, VAS score, cumulative morphine consumption, opioid-related side effects were recorded. RESULTS: There was no significant difference regarding to demographic characteristics, comorbidities, and durations of anesthesia and surgery. There was a significant difference between all groups regarding to total morphine consumption (P<0.001). IV ibuprofen significantly reduced the total morphine consumption in comparison with control and paracetamol (P<0.001). Repeated measures ANOVA showed in all periods of the study that VAS score was significantly lower in ibuprofen (P<0.001), but not in paracetamol (P=0.394) in comparison with control. There was no difference between groups regarding postoperative heart rate, mean arterial pressure, nausea-vomiting, pruritus and urinary retention. CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that pain scores and morphine consumption, but not the side effects of patient-controlled analgesia during 24hours after the lumbar disk surgery, were significantly reduced by IV ibuprofen as a supplemental analgesic when compared with controls and paracetamols.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to develop, validate and apply a high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) assay for analysis of paracetamol, paracetamol glucuronide and paracetamol sulfate in plasma (venous and capillary) and saliva to study paracetamol pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers. METHODS: Samples were prepared using protein precipitation and analysed using reverse phase HPLC with UV detection. This assay was applied to venous and capillary plasma and saliva samples from 20 healthy volunteers after paracetamol 1g four times daily for three days. KEY FINDINGS: The HPLC assay for paracetamol and its metabolites was found to be sensitive and selective in plasma and saliva samples over the range 0.05-50 mg/l with an inter- and intraday precision and accuracy within 11.2% and 11.1%, respectively. Mean recoveries for all analytes were > 88%. A study of paracetamol pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers found close agreement between the sampling matrices for paracetamol and metabolites (metabolites were not detected in saliva). The value for area under the concentration-time curve over the 6h dosing interval of venous plasma (45.3+/-12.9mg/l.h) was significantly higher than that observed for capillary plasma (33.8+/-12.9mg/l.h) or saliva (35.1+/-9.4mg/l.h; P>0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Capillary blood and saliva collection were found to be reliable sampling matrices for the evaluation of paracetamol pharmacokinetics, although paracetamol metabolites were not detected in saliva.
