Detection of the psychostimulants pemoline (Tradon), fenozolone (Ordinator) and thozalinone (Stimsen) in biological samples (urine) presents certain experimental difficulties. These substances were therefore converted by acid hydrolysis to their common hydrolysis product 5-phenyl-2,4-oxazolidinedione, which can be detected with high sensitivity and selectivity by thin layer chromatography. After silylation with N-methyl-N-trimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide/trimethylchlorosilane quantitative results can be obtained from the same extract by the proposed GC/MS-method. After a single dose of 30 mg pemoline, levels ranging from one to four mg/l urine were observed.
A 36-year-old female, presenting with jaundice, developed acute liver failure requiring orthotopic liver transplantation. On admission, none of the known causative factors for acute hepatitis, including use of drugs, were found to be present. Several days after hospitalization, the patient admitted taking therapy prescribed by a "non-traditional" physician, that she had been using for several years due to overweight and which had recently been modified with the introduction of pemoline. A considerable body of evidence exists in the medical literature showing that pemoline, which is a central nervous system stimulant, has variable hepatotoxic effects, ranging from a mild transient increase of serum transaminases to liver failure, including some lethal cases.
Pemoline, the constituent of Tradon, is able to slow down the decrease of the mitotic index caused by 0.1% caffeine in roots of Vicia faba, and mitotic aberrations are reduced. With 0.005% colchicine and 3 x 10(-4) g/ml pemoline, no metaphase-accumulation can be observed, and anaphase-disorder is delayed.
We present a case of pemoline-induced autoimmune hepatitis in a 46-yr-old woman who received the drug for management of her multiple sclerosis. The autoimmune nature of the hepatitis is based on elevation of her anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-thyroid antibodies, IgA, and IgM globulins. These features of autoimmunity disappeared with normalization of her liver-associated enzymes and have remained negative for at least 6 months after completion of prednisone therapy.
OBJECTIVE: To measure the effects of fluoxetine and pemoline on heart period and QT variability. METHODS: Healthy volunteers were randomly assigned treatment with 20 mg daily of fluoxetine (n=7), 56.25 mg of pemoline (n=7) or placebo (n=9). Twenty-four-hour Holter ECGs were obtained before and after approximately 8 weeks of double-blind treatment. RESULTS: There were no significant changes in the fluoxetine group. Pemoline was associated with a significant decrease in the high frequency (HF) power (0.15-0.5 Hz, P=.02) and fractal dimension of RR time series (P=.03). QTvi, a measure of QT interval variability, increased in the pemoline group (P=.05). CONCLUSION: Pemoline, but not fluoxetine, decreases heart period variability (HPV) in the HF power, suggesting a vagolytic effect on cardiac autonomic function. Pemoline is also associated with an increase in QT interval variability, a measure that is sensitive to adrenergic agonists.
1 Effects of prolintane (15 and 30 mg) and pemoline (60 and 100 mg) on sleep were studied in six healthy adult males. Sleep was assessed by electroencephalography and by analogue scales. 2 Prolintane (15 and 30 mg) reduced rapid eye movement (REM) sleep both by delaying the first period (P < 0.05 and < 0.001 respectively) and by reducing total REM sleep (P < 0.05 and < 0.001 respectively). In some subjects there were increased awakenings during the early part of the night, and in two subjects long periods of wakefulness occurred. 3 With pemoline (60 and 100 mg) sleep duration was marked reduced (P < 0.001). There was evidence in some subjects of delay to the first REM period, and reduced percentage REM sleep (P < 0.01). Shortened and fragmented sleep with 60 and 100 mg were associated with reduced sleep efficiency indices (P < 0.001), and shorter sleep period times led to reduced REM/NREM ratios. Absence of an effect on REM latency for the subjects as a group may be related to relatively slow absorption. 4 The heterocyclic amphetamine derivatives have variable effects on sleep. The differences may be dose related, and wakefulness and reduced REM sleep may be seen together or separately. Alterations in sleep occur with doses of pemoline and prolintane which also modify performance.
To test the hypothesis that any change in urinary noradrenergic excretion accompanies drug-induced improvement in attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity, the authors gave pemoline (mean dose, 2.9 mg/kg of body weight) to 11 boys with this disorder in a 4-week open trial. Pemoline administration improved behavior but did not significantly change urinary catecholamine excretion. Serotonin excretion was unchanged, but phenylethylamine (PEA) and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) were significantly decreased. Clinical responders and nonresponders did not differ with respect to baseline urinary monoamine excretion or change in PEA and 5-HIAA excretion.
Levamisole is an anti-helminthic drug and gained forensic interest after it was found that it was used as a cocaine adulterant. A liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) method for the determination of levamisole and its metabolite aminorex in human plasma is described. Selectivity is given; calibration curves were linear within a calibration range of 1 ng/mL-500 ng/mL. Limits of detection and quantification (LODs, LOQs) were 0.85 ng/mL for levamisole and 0.09 ng/mL, and 0.34 ng/mL for aminorex, respectively. Precision data was in accordance with the GTFCh guidelines. The validated method was successfully applied to study the pharmacokinetics of levamisole after administration of 100 mg of levamisole orally. Levamisole could be detected up to 36 h after ingestion in serum, while aminorex never exceeded the LOQ. A one-compartment model best described levamisole pharmacokinetics. The following parameters were calculated: ka = 1.2 [1/h], CL/F = 52 l/h, V/F = 347 l, f (renal) = 0.0005, t (1/2) = 2.0 h, AUC = 1923 ng/mL*h, cmax = 214 ng/mL, tmax = 1.98 h. Levamisole could be quantified in 42.5% of cocaine--positive plasma samples (2.2 to 224 ng/mL). Aminorex was positive in only 11.3% of the cases; however, it was never found higher than the LOQ. Pemoline, another stimulant detected in horse urine samples after administration of levamisole, was not found either in serum or in urine of this pharmacokinetic study. In post-mortem cases, levamisole and aminorex could be detected in femoral blood and the urine of cocaine users. Pemoline was not detected.
The pharmacokinetic behaviour of pemoline was studied in 28 children, aged 5 to 12 years, diagnosed as having the attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity. The mean elimination half-life of pemoline in these children was approximately 7 hours, which is considerably shorter than the half-life of 11 to 13 hours previously reported in adults. The tendency of the half-life to increase with age may be explained by the statistically significant decrease in total body clearance with age. The increasing half-life of pemoline with age should be considered during long term drug therapy. In this study no tolerance to the beneficial effects of pemoline was observed over 6 months. The apparent therapeutic serum concentration range for these children was attained after doses of 37.5 to 131.25 mg pemoline daily. Since the optimum serum concentration shows wide variation, the dosing regimen must be determined individually. Routine monitoring of the pemoline serum concentrations is not useful because of this apparent variation in optimum serum concentration and because of the linear relationship between dose and concentration.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with methylphenidate hydrochloride or pemoline diminishes the response to growth hormone (GH) therapy in patients with idiopathic GH deficiency (IGHD) or idiopathic short stature (ISS). METHODS: The National Cooperative Growth Study database was used to identify patients between 3 and 20 years of age with IGHD or ISS and those within these groups who were treated with methylphenidate or pemoline for ADHD. Their growth in response to GH treatment (change in height standard deviation score [SDS]) was compared with that of patients with IGHD or ISS who were not treated for ADHD, by using a stepwise multiple regression analysis. RESULTS: In the IGHD cohort, there were 184 patients who were being treated for ADHD and 2313 who were not. In the ISS cohort there were 117 patients who were being treated for ADHD and 1283 who were not. There was a higher percentage of males being treated for ADHD in both cohorts. In the IGHD cohort, the change in height SDS was positively associated with the number of years of GH treatment, parents' heights, body mass index, and GH injection schedule, and was negatively associated with height SDS at the initiation of GH therapy, age, and maximum stimulated GH level. The use of methylphenidate or pemoline had a negative effect on the change in height SDS, but the magnitude of the effect was small. Similar effects were noted in the ISS cohort, but body mass index and the use of methylphenidate or pemoline had no effect on the change in height SDS. CONCLUSIONS: Concurrent ADHD therapy is associated with a slight decrease in the change in height SDS during GH treatment in patients with IGHD but not in those with ISS. Even in IGHD, the magnitude of the effect is small and should not deter the use of such concurrent therapy.
Addictive use of the stimulant drug pemoline caused a delusional disorder in a middle-aged man. Discontinuance of use of the drug promptly reversed the psychosis, which subsequently recurred when pemoline was again used. Pemoline seems to be an addictive drug and has an additional property that heretofore has been attributed mainly to amphetamines--precipitation of a paranoid psychosis.
A clinical study has been conducted on a selected group of 9 children and 12 adults with attention deficit disorder, evaluating the response to the therapy with magnesium pemoline by means of EEG power spectra. Pemoline was given orally in increasing doses ranging from 20 to 80 mg/day. EEG was recorded during baseline and at three fixed intervals during the treatment. Clinical response was assessed by objective and subjective ratings. In the adult sample, the drug produced two opposite patterns of EEG response which allowed us to discriminate by the 1st day of treatment responders who reported a paradoxical calming and non-responders who reported a worsening in anxiety. Inconsistent EEG power changes produced by the drug in children did not allow the discrimination of responders and non-responders. Children did not show paradoxical signs of sedation. EEG and clinical data suggest that adults and children show different drug response and that the paradoxical sedation is present only in adults.
A simple gas chromatographic assay of the psychostimulant pemoline in human urine has been developed. Instead of extraction of the drug from urine, it is hydrolysed to 5-phenyl-2,4-oxazolidinedione with 1 N hydrochloric acid. After the extraction, this compound is methylated with diazomethane and determined by gas-liquid chromatography using a nitrogen-selective detector and a solid injection system. The method has been applied in preliminary human pharmacokinetic studies, by measuring the urinary excretion rate of pemoline following oral administration. At present, the screening procedures for doping control do not involve the detection of pemoline, but the method described can easily be incorporated in such procedures.
