The dielectric properties of two pharmaceuticals nizatidine and perphenazine were investigated in the supercooled liquid and glassy states by broadband dielectric spectroscopy. Two relaxation processes were observed in both the pharmaceuticals. The relaxation process observed above the glass transition temperature is the structural alpha relaxation and below the glass transition temperature is the gamma relaxation of intramolecular origin. The Johari-Goldstein beta relaxation coming from the motion of the entire molecule is found to be hidden under the structural relaxation peak in both the pharmaceuticals.
In this pilot study, we have investigated the effects of switching from olanzapine or risperidone treatment to low-dose perphenazine combined with buspirone in six schizophrenic patients who had experienced weight gain. We found no relapse as to psychotic symptoms measured by the CGI-S scale and no exacerbation of extrapyramidal side-effects as measured by the Simpson-Angus Scale. In addition, we observed a medium weight reduction of 10.5 kg (range 1-20 kg).
Cutaneous melanoma is least common (only about 1% of skin cancers) but is the deadliest malignant tumor. Moreover, amelanotic types of melanoma are very difficult for clinical diagnosis. The standard therapy can cause a lot of side effects, e.g., nausea, vomiting, and headaches, which means that novel and effective strategies are required. Interestingly, phenothiazine derivatives possess sedative, antiemetic, and anticancer activity. Our goal was to determine the effect of perphenazine and prochlorperazine on cell viability, motility, microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) and tyrosinase content in melanotic and amelanotic melanoma cells. The viability of C32 and COLO829 melanoma cells was evaluated by the WST-1 colorimetric assay; impact on motility of human melanoma was performed by wound-healing assay, while tyrosinase and MITF content were determined by Western blot. In the present study, we explore the anticancer effect of perphenazine and prochlorperazine in human melanotic (COLO829) and amelanotic (C32) melanoma cells concluding that prochlorperazine inhibits cell viability in a concentration-dependent manner, impairs motility, and decreases tyrosinase and MITF amounts. Moreover, the analyzed drugs decrease/increase MITF amount depending on the type of melanoma. We demonstrated that the decrease of MITF and tyrosinase protein induces motility inhibition of C32 cells, which suggests the ability of those drugs to restore cancer cell sensitivity to treatment. The ability of prochlorperazine to contain the spread of the amelanotic melanoma in vivo may be helpful in the development of a new and effective antimelanoma therapies.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: despite the introduction of newer antiemetics in the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV), perphenazine is recommended in current guidelines, as the concept of multimodal management of PONV in high-risk patients requires more than two drugs to be combined. The aim of this quantitative systematic review was to assess the efficacy and safety of perphenazine in the prophylaxis of PONV in adults and children. METHODS: randomised controlled trials investigating the efficacy of perphenazine in the prevention of PONV in comparison with any other drug or placebo were systematically searched in MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and the Cochrane Library. Dichotomous data on the efficacy and adverse effects were combined and relative risks (RRs) as well as corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. RESULTS: eleven trials published between 1965 and 1999 including a total of 2081 participants fulfilled the inclusion criteria and were further analysed. In children, perphenazine 0.07 mg kg was effective in preventing vomiting (RR, 0.31; 95% CI, 0.18-0.54), whereas in adults, a dose of about 5 mg was effective for the prevention of PONV (RR, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.37-0.67). When compared with established newer drugs, for example, ondansetron, dexamethasone or droperidol, no significant differences were observed in the pooled analysis with limited data. Reporting of adverse events was poor. Transient sedation was reported in three eligible trials (RR, 0.9; 95% CI, 0.40-2.05). CONCLUSION: there is evidence that perphenazine is effective in the prevention of PONV in children and adults without serious adverse effects compared with placebo.
Alzheimer's disease is imposing a growing social and economic burden worldwide, and effective therapies are urgently required. One possible approach to modulation of the disease outcome is to use small molecules to limit the conversion of monomeric amyloid (Abeta42) to cytotoxic amyloid oligomers and fibrils. We have synthesized modulators of amyloid assembly that are unlike others studied to date: these compounds act primarily by sequestering the Abeta42 monomer. We provide kinetic and nuclear magnetic resonance data showing that these perphenazine conjugates divert the Abeta42 monomer into amorphous aggregates that are not cytotoxic. Rapid monomer sequestration by the compounds reduces fibril assembly, even in the presence of pre-formed fibrillar seeds. The compounds are therefore also able to disrupt monomer-dependent secondary nucleation, the autocatalytic process that generates the majority of toxic oligomers. The inhibitors have a modular design that is easily varied, aiding future exploration and use of these tools to probe the impact of distinct Abeta42 species populated during amyloid assembly.
Fluphenazine and perphenazine as a phenothiazine-class antipsychotic drugs are widely used to treat psychoses and schizophrenia, however their use is associated with significant side effects such as extrapyramidal symptoms as well as ocular and skin disorders. The aim of this study was to examine the effect of fluphenazine and perphenazine on cell viability, melanogenesis and antioxidant defense system in normal human melanocytes. It has been shown that both phenothiazines induce concentration-dependent loss in cell viability. The value of EC(5)(0). was calculated to be 1.24 and 2.76 muM for fluphenazine and perphenazine, respectively. Fluphenazine in concentration of 1.0 muM and perphenazine in concentrations of 1.0 and 3.0 muM inhibied melanogenesis and decreased microphthalmia-associated transcription factor content. To study the effect of both analyzed drugs on antioxidant defense system in melanocytes, the level of hydrogen peroxide and the activities of antioxidant enzymes: superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase were determined. Fluphenazine and perphenazine in higher analyzed concentrations caused depletion of melanocytes antioxidant status, what indicated the induction of oxidative stress. The observed changes in melanization process and antioxidant defense system in pigmented cells exposed to fluphenazine and perphenazine in vibo suggest a significant role of melanin and melanocytes in the mechanisms of undesirable side effects of these drugs in vivo, especially directed to pigmented tissues. Moreover, the presented differences in modulation of biochemical processes in melanocytes may be an explanation for various toxic activity of the analyzed phenothiazine derivatives in vivo.
Fluphenazine HCl (FLU) is an anxiolytic, while Nortriptyline HCl (NOR) is an anti-depressant. They are co-formulated together to treat depression and schizophrenia. Perphenazine (PER) and dibenzosuberone (DBZ) are the pharmacopeial impurities of FLU and NOR, respectively. Four spectrophotometric and multivariate chemometric methods were developed to determine the two drugs together or in presence of their two impurities in their bulk and pharmaceutical formulation. Method (A) is the triple divisor-ratio derivative (TDR) method, where the zero order spectrum of each component was divided by a mixture of the other 3 components, then the peak amplitudes of the first derivative spectra of FLU, NOR and DBZ were measured at 265, 245.4 and 283.2 nm, respectively. Method (B) is the double divisor-ratio difference-dual wavelength (DD-RD-DW) method, in which each component spectrum mixture was divided by a binary mixture of 2 of the interfering components. In the resulting ratio spectra, the amplitude difference is calculated between 2 wavelengths at which the third interfering component has zero difference. Methods (C and D) are the principle component analysis (PCA) and partial least squares (PLS) models. Methods (A and B) failed to quantify PER (FLU impurity), while (C and D) succeeded to quantify all components. The four methods have been applied for the prediction of the FLU and NOR in their pharmaceutical formulation with good accuracy and precision. The proposed methods have been validated according to the ICH guidelines and the results were within the acceptable limits.
Psychological morbidity is a common consequence of both Parkinson's disease and its treatment with antiparkinsonian agents. The authors describe an unusual case of a patient with Parkinson's disease and a psychosis who was treated with levodopa/carbidopa and very low dose perphenazine. The case raises the issue whether patients with profound psychological reactions to antiparkinson agents may be maintained on antiparkinsonian therapy by the addition of phenothiazines.
A 29-year-old man experienced four episodes of prolonged painful erection while being treated with perphenazine for paranoid schizophrenia. Each episode of priapism lasted five hours or longer. On two occasions, aspiration of blood from the corpora cavernosa resulted in detumescence; the other episodes were successfully managed with operative shunting of blood from the congested cavernosa. Perphenazine was discontinued after the fourth episode of priapism and antipsychotic treatment with thiothixene was subsequently initiated. During 16 months of follow-up, the patient has reported normal erections without repeat episodes of priapism.
RATIONALE: Perphenazine, a classical antipsychotic drug, has the potential to induce extrapyramidal side effects (EPS). Dopaminergic and serotonergic pathways are involved in the therapeutic and adverse effects of the drug. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the impact of polymorphisms in the dopamine D(2) and D(3) and serotonin 2A and 2C receptor genes (DRD2, DRD3, HTR2A, and HTR2C) on short-term effects of perphenazine monotherapy in schizophrenic patients. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-seven Estonian inpatients were evaluated before and after 4-6 weeks of treatment by Simpson-Angus rating scale, Barnes scale, and Positive and Negative Symptom Scale. Genotyping was performed for common DRD2, DRD3, HTR2A, and HTR2C gene polymorphisms, previously reported to influence receptor expression and/or function. RESULTS: Most of the patients (n = 37) responded to the treatment and no significant association was observed between the polymorphisms and antipsychotic response. The 102C allele of HTR2A and the -697C and 23Ser alleles of HTR2C were more frequent among patients with EPS (n = 25) compared to patients without EPS (n = 22) (p = 0.02, 0.01, and 0.02, respectively). The difference between patients with and without EPS in variant allele frequencies remained significant after multiple model analyses including age, gender, and duration of antipsychotic treatment as covariants. There was no significant association between EPS occurrence and polymorphisms in the DRD2 and DRD3 genes. CONCLUSIONS: An association was observed between polymorphisms in HTR2A and HTR2C genes and occurrence of acute EPS in schizophrenic patients treated with perphenazine monotherapy. Larger study populations are needed to confirm our findings.
In our study, poly(dl-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) nanoparticles loaded with perphenazine (PPH) and chlorpromazine hydrochloride (CPZ-HCl) were formulated by emulsion solvent evaporation technique. The effect of various processing variables, including PLGA concentration, theoretical drug loading, poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) concentration and the power of sonication were assessed systematically to obtain higher encapsulation efficiency and to minimize the nanoparticles size. By the optimization formulation process, the nanoparticles were obtained in submicron size from 325.5 +/- 32.4 to 374.3 +/- 10.1 nm for nanoparticles loaded with PPH and CPZ-HCl, respectively. Nanoparticles observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) presented smooth surface and spherical shape. The encapsulation efficiency of nanoparticles loaded with PPH and CPZ-HCl were 83.9% and 71.0%, respectively. The drug loading were 51.1% and 39.4% for PPH and CPZ-HCl, respectively. Lyophilized nanoparticles with different PLGA concentration 0.8%, 1.3% and 1.6% (w/v) in formulation process were evaluated for in vitro release in phosphate buffered saline (pH = 7.4) by using dialysis bags. The release profile for both drugs have shown that the rate of PPH and CPZ-HCl release were dependent on a size and amount of drugs in the nanoparticles.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Today, the role of oxidative stress in development of schizophrenia has gained attention. Also, some atypical antipsychotic agents showed antioxidant properties. Therefore, in this study, we evaluated the level of oxidative stress parameters between patients treated with perphenazine, clozapine and risperidone and their relationship with schizophrenia symptoms' severity. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a descriptive study on 100 patients with chronic schizophrenia. Patient selection was done based on the DSM-IV-TR criteria for at least 3 months regular use of clozapine or risperidone or perphenazine and a minimum period of 2 years of schizophrenia. Ten ml of patient's blood samples were used to assess serum levels of glutathione (GSH), protein carbonyl, lipid peroxidation (LPO), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and Ferric Reducing Ability of Plasma (FRAP). Also, the severity of symptoms was assessed with the positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS scale). P-values of less than 0.05 were considered significant. RESULTS: The results showed a significant difference between clozapine and risperidone with perphenazine in all subscales of PANSS. Also, there was a positive correlation between MDA and PANSS all subscales in risperidone and perphenazine groups and a negative correlation between MDA and PANSS in all subscales in the clozapine group. Serum level of GSH and negative symptoms in patients receiving clozapine showed a negative correlation. The results also represented that clozapine significantly increased SOD levels in comparison to perphenazine and risperidone and reduced LPO in comparison to perphenazine and risperidone, While the protein carbonyl level did not show a significant difference between three groups (p-value = 0.8). CONCLUSION: This study showed that clozapine, as an atypical antipsychotic agent, has significant antioxidant effects compared to risperidone and perphenazine. Especially, it increased SOD and GSH levels and reduced LPO in patients with schizophrenia. Therefore, clozapine's antioxidant effect may be contributive to improving negative symptoms of schizophrenic patients.
Haloperidol, fluphenazine, perphenazine, and thiothixene are "typical" antipsychotic drugs that are used in the treatment of schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders. The monitoring of the use of these drugs has applications in therapeutic drug monitoring and overdose situations. LC-MS/MS is used to analyze plasma/serum extracts with deuterated analog of imipramine as the internal standard to ensure accurate quantitation and control for any potential matrix effects. Positive ion electrospray is used to introduce the analytes into the mass spectrometer. Selected reaction monitoring of two product ions for each analyte allows for the calculation of ion ratios which ensures correct identification of each analyte, while a matrix-matched calibration curve is used for quantitation.
OBJECTIVE: Until recently, conventional antipsychotics were the standard pharmacotherapy for psychosis and behavioral disturbances associated with dementia. This double-blind, placebo-controlled study compared the acute efficacy of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor citalopram and the neuroleptic perphenazine with placebo for the treatment of psychosis and behavioral disturbances in nondepressed patients with dementia. METHOD: Eighty-five hospitalized patients with at least one moderate to severe target symptom (aggression, agitation, hostility, suspiciousness, hallucinations, or delusions) were randomly assigned to receive either citalopram, perphenazine, or placebo under double-blind conditions for up to 17 days. RESULTS: Patients treated with citalopram or perphenazine showed statistically significant improvement on several Neurobehavioral Rating Scale factor scores. Compared to those receiving placebo, only patients treated with citalopram showed significantly greater improvement in their total Neurobehavioral Rating Scale score as well as in the scores for the agitation/aggression and lability/tension factors. Side effect scores were similar among the three treatment groups. CONCLUSIONS: Citalopram was found to be more efficacious than placebo in the short-term hospital treatment of psychotic symptoms and behavioral disturbances in nondepressed, demented patients.
In this work, a ratiometric electrochemical sensor was developed for the detection of perphenazine (PPZ). The sensor was constructed by electrodepositing Cu-coordinated molecularly imprinted polymer (Cu-MIP) on Ag nanoparticles (NPs) modified flexible porous carbon cloth. The Cu-MIP showed highly electrochemical response because of the enhanced adsorptive ability and electronic properties of Cu(2+) chelation; Ag NPs could provide a stable and effective reference signal for ratiometric quantification. Thus the resulted sensor not only displayed high selectivity and sensitivity, but also exhibited satisfactory reproducibility and anti-interference ability. Under the optimum conditions, the quantitative detection of PPZ was performed with differential pulse voltammetry. It was found that the peak current ratio of PPZ and Ag NP was linear to the concentration of PPZ in the range of 1-700 nmol L(-1) (R(2) = 0.9968), and the limit of detection was 0.43 nmol L(-1) (S/N = 3). The practicability of the sensor was examined by determining human serum and pharmaceutical samples, and satisfactory results and recoveries (ranging from 92.46% to 104.90%) were achieved.
A fixed-ratio combination of amitriptyline and perphenazine was successful in treating 8 of 9 patients suffering from post-herpetic neuralgia. Side-effects were minimal. Summaries of 4 case histories are presented. In addition, 3 patients suffering from severe acute herpetic pain were successfully treated with the same drug combination.
In a six-week randomized, double-blind study the efficacy and side effects of perphenazine decanoate (PD) and perphenazine enanthate (PE) were evaluated and compared in 26 and 24 acute psychotic patients respectively. Of either formulation 100 mg were administered intramuscularly every two weeks. Maximum and minimum plasma concentrations of perphenazine were measured for each injection period using gas liquid chromatography. There was no statistically significant difference between PD and PE in terms of overall antipsychotic efficacy, assessed by means of the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS). However, when an 'Amelioration Score' (AMS) of at least 50% of the totally obtainable scores was defined as individual response criterion it was revealed that the PD group only one patient (4%) did not meet this criterion, compared with six patients (25%) in the PE group. Extrapyramidal side effects were significantly more pronounced in the PE-treated patients, who also required significantly higher amounts of antiparkinson medication. The mean maximum concentration of perphenazine in plasma was 5.0 nmol/l in the PD, and 10.6 nmol/l in the PE-treated patients. The ratio of the mean maximum to the mean minimum concentration was 1.41 and 4.02 in the decanoate and enanthate groups respectively. In the patients treated with PD there were signs of accumulation indicating the possibility of prolonging dosage intervals. The present study yielded further support to previous findings demonstrating that intramuscular administration of PD dissolved in sesame oil, in contrast to PE, results in even and flat plasma perphenazine concentration curves, which not only provides a stable antipsychotic effect but also most likely carry the responsibility for the low incidence of extrapyramidal side effects observed.
OBJECTIVES: We observed that CYP2D6 contributes to pharmacodynamic tissue sensitivity to perphenazine as measured by the areas under the curve (AUCs) expressed as a ratio (prolactin-AUC0-6/perphenazine-AUC0-6) in Chinese Canadians [Pharmacogenetics and Genomics 2007; 17:339-347]. As genetic heterogeneity in drug targets can influence drug response, we sought to further evaluate the contribution of CYP2D6 to pharmacodynamic sensitivity in our previous study sample in tandem with DRD2, the primary molecular target for perphenazine. METHODS: Genotyping for DRD2 Taq1A, -141C ins/del and Ser311Cys functional polymorphisms was performed using PCR-restriction-fragment length polymorphism methods. RESULTS: After controlling for DRD2 polymorphisms, CYP2D6 was a significant predictor of pituitary pharmacodynamic tissue sensitivity to perphenazine (P=0.024; power=80.4%). Taq1A polymorphism significantly influenced the time course of prolactin response (P=0.039; power=70%). A1/A1 genotype displayed a higher prolactin elevation 2 h after perphenazine administration (P=0.02). Patients with -141C ins/ins genotype showed a strong trend toward a 38% larger prolactin AUC compared with the -141C ins/del genotypic group (P=0.07). CONCLUSIONS: CYP2D6 seems to be an independent contributor to pituitary pharmacodynamic tissue sensitivity to perphenazine after accounting for DRD2 functional polymorphisms. The A1 allele of the Taq1A polymorphism was previously shown to decrease D2 receptor density in vitro and in neuroimaging studies in vivo. At a given antipsychotic dose, individuals with A1 allele might thus achieve a higher DRD2 antipsychotic occupancy, which is consistent with an increased prolactin elevation in the A1/A1 genotype in this study. These findings provide a basis for further studies on the endogenous substrates of CYP2D6 and the rational selection of candidate genes for long-term consequences of antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia (e.g. susceptibility to breast and prostate cancers).
