1 In a model study the influence of some variables on the accuracy of predictions of phenytoin doses which should produce desired plasma concentrations were studied. All predictions were extrapolations from low test doses with concurrent observations of plasma concentrations. 2 The variables in introduced were:--Variability in observed plasma concentration;--Variability in applied test doses;--Variability in patient characteristics as expressed in Km and Vmax values. 3 The model study generated the same sort of result as a previous one, executed in practice (Driessen. Van der Velde + Hoppener, 1980), i.e. predictions are often inaccurate and of the method tested (Richens & Dunlop, 1975; Ludden, Hawkins, Allen & Hoffman, 1976; Martin, Tozer, Sheiner & Riegelman, 1977; Rambeck, Boenigk, Dunlop, Mullen, Wadsworth & Richens, 1980), Richens' first nomogram (Richens & Dunlop, 1975) is to be preferred.
By intrapatient comparison at constant phenytoin (PHT) dose, the effect of carbamazepine (CBZ) comedication on PHT was studied in a group of 24 epileptic outpatients. In half of the patients with steady-state PHT plasma concentration, a significant increase of this concentration was noted after CBZ was added to their regimen. Twenty percent showed clinical manifestations of acute drug toxicity initially thought to be CBZ related. The mean PHT plasma concentration for the 12 patients (22.7 +/- 5.64 micrograms/ml) as well as concentration/dose ratio for PHT (4.61 +/- 1.65 micrograms/ml plasma per mg/kg/day dose) was significantly higher (p less than 0.001) with concomitant administration of CBZ than when PHT was given alone: PHT concentration, 12.54 +/- 3.93 micrograms/ml and PHT concentration/dose ratio, 2.52 +/- 0.78 micrograms/ml plasma per mg/kg/day dose. Those patients with higher PHT plasma concentrations seem to be at higher risk of PHT toxicity due to CBZ comedication.
Phenytoin is a long-standing, anti-seizure drug widely used in clinical practice. It has also been evaluated in the context of many other illnesses in addition to its original epilepsy indication. The narrow therapeutic index of phenytoin and its ubiquitous daily use pose a high risk of poisoning. This review article focuses on the chemistry, pharmacokinetics, and toxicology of phenytoin, with a special focus on its mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, and teratogenicity. The side effects on human health associated with phenytoin use are thoroughly described. In particular, DRESS syndrome and cerebellar atrophy are addressed. This review will help in further understanding the benefits phenytoin use in the treatment of epilepsy.
Crossover studies were conducted to compare plasma levels of phenytoin and urinary throughput of the major metabolite, 5-(p-hydroxyphenyl)-5-phenylhydantoin (HPPH), after ingestion of single 250-mg oral doses as tablets or as capsules. Plasma levels of phenytoin did not differ significantly for the 2 formulations except at 8 and 12 hr after ingestion of drug, when the mean values for the tablets were higher than for the capsules. The normalized area under the curve, however, did not differ significantly for either preparation, indicating that equivalent amounts of each preparation were absorbed. Urinary throughput of HPPH did not differ significantly between the 2 preparations. The results suggest that the 2 preparations provide equivalent therapeutic effects.
A 15-year-old boy developed thrombocytopenia and purpura two weeks after starting phenytoin therapy. The blood phenytoin level was in the toxic range. There was an increase in immature neutrophils but no abnormalities were present in other cell lines. Recovery was complete after drug therapy was discontinued. Thrombocytopenia is a rare isolated complication of phenytoin therapy. The probable autoimmune etiology distinguishes this syndrome from other phenytoin-induced blood dyscrasias.
An increase in the time required to achieve the peak plasma concentration is observed following the oral administration of increasing doses of phenytoin. Zero-order absorption is the usual explanation for this observation. The presence of Michaelis-Menten elimination also increases the peak time when absorption is first order. The contribution of each of these mechanisms in vivo is unknown.
BACKGROUND: Although phenytoin's potential benefits in wound healing, pain relief, and infection control across various wound types have been previously reported, its use in wound care remains limited. OBJECTIVE: To conduct a comprehensive review to assess the efficacy of topical phenytoin compared with standard and alternative treatments for different wound types. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The authors last searched Cochrane Library, PubMed, PubMed Central, and MEDLINE in June 2023. All English-language human RCTs and NRCTs from any time were included. The RoB 2 was used to assess quality of randomized trials, and the ROBINS-I was used to assess the quality of nonrandomized trials. Studies with a low risk of bias or some concerns in no more than 1 domain were included. Data collected and analyzed included wound type, interventions, sample size, outcome measures, and adverse effects. RESULTS: The search yielded 101 studies, of which 17 RCTs and 8 NRCTs were eligible for inclusion. Of the included studies, 56% had a low risk of bias in all domains. The sample sizes varied between 20 and 130 (median, 60), with a total sample size of 1653 patients. Phenytoin improved wound healing in 17 of the 24 studies that evaluated it (71%), increased granulation tissue in 9 of the 10 studies that evaluated it (90%), provided analgesic effects in 7 of the 13 studies that evaluated it (54%), and inhibited bacterial contaminants in 6 of the 8 studies that evaluated it (75%). Adverse effects were rare (29%), minimal, and transient. CONCLUSION: Phenytoin enhances wound healing and offers analgesic and antibacterial properties with minimal adverse effects. Further research is needed on optimal dosage of phenytoin, as well as frequency, delivery vehicles, and effects on other postoperative wounds. BACKGROUND: Although phenytoin's potential benefits in wound healing, pain relief, and infection control across various wound types have been previously reported, its use in wound care remains limited. OBJECTIVE: To conduct a comprehensive review to assess the efficacy of topical phenytoin compared with standard and alternative treatments for different wound types. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The authors last searched Cochrane Library, PubMed, PubMed Central, and MEDLINE in June 2023. All English-language human RCTs and NRCTs from any time were included. The RoB 2 was used to assess quality of randomized trials, and the ROBINS-I was used to assess the quality of nonrandomized trials. Studies with a low risk of bias or some concerns in no more than 1 domain were included. Data collected and analyzed included wound type, interventions, sample size, outcome measures, and adverse effects. RESULTS: The search yielded 101 studies, of which 17 RCTs and 8 NRCTs were eligible for inclusion. Of the included studies, 56% had a low risk of bias in all domains. The sample sizes varied between 20 and 130 (median, 60), with a total sample size of 1653 patients. Phenytoin improved wound healing in 17 of the 24 studies that evaluated it (71%), increased granulation tissue in 9 of the 10 studies that evaluated it (90%), provided analgesic effects in 7 of the 13 studies that evaluated it (54%), and inhibited bacterial contaminants in 6 of the 8 studies that evaluated it (75%). Adverse effects were rare (29%), minimal, and transient. CONCLUSION: Phenytoin enhances wound healing and offers analgesic and antibacterial properties with minimal adverse effects. Further research is needed on optimal dosage of phenytoin, as well as frequency, delivery vehicles, and effects on other postoperative wounds.
Phenytoin (diphenylhydantoin; Dilantin) is a highly effective and widely prescribed anticonvulsant and antiarrhythmic agent. Since 1938 it has been invaluable in the treatment of grand mal and psychomotor epilepsy. Hydantoin derivatives have been used medicinally for more than a half-century. In recent years dermatologists have broadened the indications for phenytoin use to include recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa, linear scleroderma, and pachyonychia congenita. In spite of widespread use and popularity, it is interesting that the frequency of complications relating to drug therapy remains low, relatively speaking. Nevertheless, a broad spectrum of cutaneous and immunologic reactions to phenytoin have been reported. These range from tissue proliferative syndromes (side effects), drug hypersensitivity syndromes (allergic effects), and a possible linkage with lymphoma (idiosyncratic effects). Therapeutic and toxic reactions to this commonly prescribed drug are comprehensively reviewed, analyzed, and summarized in this monograph.
Phenytoin is a low solubility anticonvulsant drug. It has, nonetheless, other possible therapeutic indications, such as neuropathic pain, including trigeminal neuralgia, or wound healing. Its use has decreased due to side effects, but nasal/intranasal administration could significantly increase drug safety and efficacy. The aim of this work was to develop and study nanoemulsions and thermosensitive nanoemulgels of phenytoin and fosphenytoin, in combination, for intranasal administration, with immediate and sustained release profiles. Nanoemulsions were prepared by adding the aqueous phase, containing gelling polymers in the case of nanoemulgels, to emulsion preconcentrates, followed, in the optimized procedure, by premix membrane emulsification. Formulation design and optimization was guided by drug strength, rheological behavior, osmolality, mean droplet size and polydispersity. Fosphenytoin interfered significantly with Carbopol but not with Pluronic's gelation, and allowed to achieve drug strengths equivalent to 22 or 27 mg/g of phenytoin in lead nanoemulsions, and 16.7 mg/g of phenytoin in the lead nanoemulgel. The final selected low viscosity nanoemulsions had an immediate or prolonged fosphenytoin release profile, depending of anhydrous phase proportion (10% or 40%, respectively). The thermosensitive nanoemulgel, with 10% anhydrous phase, showed prolonged drug release. Future studies will establish whether they are more suited for topical effects or therapeutic brain delivery.
Plasma concentrations of two phenytoin products (a conventional phenytoin acid preparation and a microcrystalline form of phenytoin acid) were studied after single dose administration and during steady-state conditions in four healthy male volunteers. Relative bioavailability for the conventional tablet in comparison with the microcrystallin was in the range of 48-80% during single dose administration and in the range 54-95% at steady-rate. The microcrystalline preparation gave, as expected, a higher rate of absorption. During steady-state conditions, however, this higher rate of absorption was associated with considerable fluctuations in plamsa concentration during the dosage interval. The mean maximum plasma concentration was about 50% high than the value at the beginning of the dose interval (2-dose concentration value) when the microcrystalline product was administered. The corresponding figure was only about 25% for the conventional tablet. Since upward fluctuations in plasma concentrations may be associated with side effects, the more even level obtained with the conventional product may be an advantage from the clinical point of view. An incresed rate of bioavailability is not a clinical improvement if it occurs at the expense of greater fluctuations in plasma concentration during the dose interval.
The hydantoin scaffold is of substantial importance and it is commonly used in drug discovery. Herein, we report the synthesis of a novel phenytoine (a hydantoin derivative) with high yield by the reaction of phenytoin with 1-bromodecyl agent. Namely, 3-decyl-5,5- diphenylimidazolidine-2,4-dione (3DDID). The optimized geometry of the compound was calculated using density functional theory (DFT) method by B3LYP with 6-311++G(d,p) basis set. For this calculation, the X-ray data were used as initial values. Molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) surface and Frontier molecular orbitals (FOMs) were prepared for the compound. The crystal structure of the title compound contains intermolecular N-H...O, C-H...O hydrogen bonds and weak C-H...pi interactions. Hirshfeld surface analysis and 2D fingerprint plots of the molecule aid comparison of intermolecular interactions and these analysis reveals that two close contacts are associated with intermolecular hydrogen bonds. The psychotropic activity evaluation of the synthesized compound was further explored using hole bored test for exploratory behaviors, dark//light box test for anxiolytic activity and Rota-road, traction, chimney testes were used to assess the myrelaxant effect. In addition, molecular modeling study was also conducted to rationalize the potential as neurotherapeutic drugs of our synthesized compound by predicting their binding modes, binding affinities and optimal orientation at the active site of the GABA-A receptor and Na(+) channel. Finally, in silico ADMET predictions was also examined. HighlightsSynthesis, structural, and molecular characterization of a novel phenytoin derivative.DFT, XRD, and the Hirshfeld surface analysis of crystal structure was studied.Acute toxicity and psychotropic activity evaluation of 3-decyl-5,5 diphenylimidazolidine-2,4-dione (3DDID).Molecular modeling studies have been conducted to rationalize the obtained data and to determine the probable binding mode.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.
A comparative study of the bioavailability of seven formulations of phenytoin was carried out on 17 patients with epilepsy who were taking phenytoin regularly as part of their drug therapy. Three patients withdrew for personal reasons. No significant differences were found between Epanutin capsules and other generic formulations. However significant differences were noted between the generic products. Phenytoin BP tablets manufactured by Regent Laboratories (now withdrawn) had a relative bioavailability of only 76% compared with tablets manufactured by A H Cox and Company. In vitro dissolution tests requirements were met by all formulations of generic 100 mg tablets, and it was concluded that in vitro dissolution tests are not reliable indicators of biological equivalence. Significantly higher plasma levels were found with Epanutin Infatabs, but this was accounted for by their higher content of phenytoin, which is present in the acid form rather than the sodium salt.
An interaction between phenytoin (PHT) and clonazepam (CZP) occurred in an epileptic patient, who had been treated with PHT with partial seizure control. The addition of CZP brought about a significant decrease of PHT plasma levels (from 24.8 to 16 micrograms/ml) in spite of increases in the PHT dose. Gradual reduction of CZP, without modifying the PHT dosage, caused significant increases in PHT plasma levels to 42.4 micrograms/ml with signs of intoxication. A review of the literature shows contradictions: some authors state that there is no interaction between the drugs; other authors state either an increase or decrease in PHT plasma levels. These paradoxical results could be explained by the bidirectional effect of these drugs in hepatic enzyme metabolism. The importance of monitoring plasma levels of antiepileptic drugs is emphasized when several medications are required in the treatment of epilepsy.
The focus of the present work was to investigate compatibility between commonly used diluents and the drug (salt and acid form of the phenytoin). Lactose monohydrate (LMH), lactitol hydrate (LCT), and mannitol (MNT) were selected based on commercial products information of phenytoin sodium (PS) and phenytoin acid (PHT). Binary mixtures of the drug-diluent were stored at 60 degrees C and 40 degrees C/75% RH. Similarly, two commercial products, namely Product-A and Product-B, were also investigated in in-use stability. Color of PS-LMH changed from white to yellowish-brown and pH dropped by 3.4 units after 4 weeks exposure. FTIR, XRPD, and NIR chemical images indicated disproportionation in PS-LMH and PS-LCT mixtures stored at 40 degrees C/75% RH. Furthermore, PS-LMH also indicated chemical interactions as indicated by distortion of LMH peaks. PHT-diluent mixture did not exhibit any physical and chemical modifications. Product-A changed color, increased weight, dropped pH value, and exhibited disproportionation and chemical reactions. The dissolution of Product-A decreased from 83.3 +/- 1.4 to 7.1 +/- 4.4% on 8 weeks exposure to 30 degrees C/75% RH. On the other hand, Product-B did not change; however, dissolution decreased by 15%. In conclusion, PS showed disproportionation and chemical reactions with LMH. Therefore, LMH should be avoided in PS formulations.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: To compare the absolute bioavailability of phenytoin (PHT) sodium solution and PHT acid suspension in healthy volunteers receiving continuously infused enteral feedings. DESIGN: Randomized, open-label, single-dose, three-period crossover study. SETTING: University clinical research center. SUBJECTS: Ten healthy volunteers age 23-43 years. INTERVENTIONS: The three phases of the study were separated by at least 7 days. During phase A, subjects received PHT sodium 435 mg intravenously over 30 minutes. During phases B and C, subjects had a nasogastric feeding tube placed through which PHT acid suspension 400 mg and PHT sodium solution 435 mg were administered, respectively. For phases B and C, continuous enteral feedings were given by feeding tube for 14 hours before and after the PHT dose. Blood samples were collected over 72 hours after each PHT dose, and the serum was analyzed for PHT. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The rate and extent of PHT absorption and PHT pharmacokinetics were determined using an empirical quadratic function of time method. Bioavailability, rate of absorption, maximum concentration (Cmax), and time to maximum concentration (Tmax) were compared for the two enteral doses by paired Student's t test. There were no significant differences in bioavailability for PHT acid suspension and PHT sodium solution (0.88 +/- 0.15 vs 0.91 +/- 0.7, p=0.57, 90% CI -0.14-0.071). The Cmax was greater (7.4 +/- 0.9 mg/L vs 5.5 +/- 1.7 mg/L, p=0.019) and Tmax was less (2.5 +/- 3.8 vs.14.8 +/- 11.2 hrs, p=0.004) for the sodium solution. The time to 50% fractional absorption (0.33 +/- 0.08 vs 3.2 +/- 2.4 hrs, p=0.004) and 90% fractional absorption (7.9 +/- 6.2 vs 22.3 +/- 17.2 hrs, p=0.021) was also significantly shorter for the sodium solution. CONCLUSION: The absolute bioavailability of the two dosage forms of PHT administered with concomitant enteral feedings were not significantly different, however, the absorption patterns were significantly different, with the sodium solution being more rapidly absorbed.
