The properties of pilocarpine as a ligand toward the halides of cobalt(II), nickel(II), copper(II), and zinc(II) were investigated. Pilocarpine behaved as a monodentate ligand, giving rise to compounds with the general formula methyl(pilocarpine)2X2. The coordinating geometry at the metal ion was pseudotetrahedral in every case. PMR studies showed that the pyridine-type nitrogen of the imidazole ring of pilocarpine was the donor atom of the ligand.
OBJECTIVES: Pilocarpine (PILO) and cevimeline (CEV) are muscarinic acetylcholine receptor agonists that stimulate salivary gland function. The aim of this investigation was to retrospectively run a head-to-head comparison for their effectiveness and frequency of adverse effects in patients with hyposalivation. METHODS: A retrospective chart review was conducted for patients seen at the Oral Medicine Clinic at Tufts University School of Dental Medicine (TUSDM) and was prescribed PILO or CEV. Patients' demographics, medical history/medication, stimulated salivary (SS), and unstimulated salivary (US) flow recorded at the initial visit and at 3- and 6-month follow-ups were collected. Changes in dosage/frequency, side effects, and drug discontinuation were also reported. RESULTS: A total of 110 patients' charts were reviewed. The majority of subjects (91%) were females with an average age of 61. At 3-month follow-up, the use of CEV showed significant improvement in SS compared to PILO (p = .033) but not in US (p = .10). At 6-month follow-up, there was no significant difference in SS or US between the two groups (SS: p = .09; US: p = .71). The use of PILO was associated with a higher proportion of adverse effects compared to CEV (p = .04). The overall adherence rate was significantly higher in the CEV group (p = .0056). CONCLUSIONS: The effectiveness of CEV and PILO is comparable. However, PILO seems to be associated with more reporting of side effects.
A rapid and convenient reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatographic procedure for the quantitative determination of pilocarpine and its degradation products was used to analyze 10 clinical ophthalmic pilocarpine formulations.
BACKGROUND: Pilocarpine has been used widely in the treatment of dry mouth and glaucoma. In this review, the authors assessed the efficacy and safety of pilocarpine for patients with head and neck cancer who have radiation-induced xerostomia. TYPES OF STUDIES REVIEWED: The authors conducted a systematic search including meta-analyses and randomized controlled trials in the following databases: MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Library, and Science Citation Index Expanded. The primary outcome was the severity of xerostomia (measured using visual analog scale [VAS] scores). Adverse events were other outcomes of interest. The authors performed meta-analyses where appropriate. The authors used the Cochrane Collaboration's tool for assessing risk of bias to assess the quality of the study. RESULTS: The authors identified 6 studies (including 752 patients in total). The results of a meta-analysis of 3 articles showed that pilocarpine was associated with a 12-point increase in VAS score (mean difference, 12.00; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.93-22.08; P = .02) and higher rates of adverse events compared with placebo in terms of sweating (odds ratio [OR], 3.71; 95% CI, 2.34-5.86; P < .00001). There were no differences in rhinitis (OR, 1.21; 95% CI, 0.68-2.16; P = .52) and nausea (OR, 1.44; 95% CI, 0.83-2.49; P = .19). CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS: On the basis of the best available evidence, the results of this meta-analysis provide evidence that pilocarpine offers statistically significant clinical benefits for the symptomatic treatment of radiation-induced xerostomia in patients with head and neck cancer. However, the authors of this systematic review found the best available evidence in the meta-analysis in 3 studies, 1 of which showed no effect. The authors of this systematic review suggest that these patients take 5 milligrams of pilocarpine 3 times daily, and that there is need for further study.
The development of an effective transdermal drug delivery protocol to eccrine sweat glands is important for the advancement of research on the human sweating response. We investigated whether microneedle treatment prior to the application of pilocarpine, a hydrophilic and sudorific agent that does not induce sweating due to a limited percutaneous passive diffusion by skin application alone, augments sweat production. We applied three microneedle arrays to forearm skin sites simultaneously (n = 20). Upon removal of the microneedles, 1 % pilocarpine was applied to each site for 5-, 15-, and 30-min for the assessment of sweat gland function. In parallel, pilocarpine was administered by transdermal iontophoresis (5-min) at a separate site. Sweat rate was assessed continuously via the ventilated capsule technique. Pilocarpine augmented sweat rate at the 15- and 30-min periods as compared to the application at 5-min. The sweating responses induced by the 15- and 30-min application of pilocarpine were equivalent to  approximately  80 % of that measured at the iontophoretically treated sites. Notably, we observed a correlation in sweat rate between these two transdermal drug delivery methods. Altogether, our findings show that pre-treatment of microneedle arrays can enhance transdermal delivery efficiency of pilocarpine to human eccrine sweat glands.
We compared the effects of pilocarpine 4% alone, timolol 0.5% alone, and a combination of timolol 0.5% and pilocarpine 4% in the treatment of glaucoma. We treated 43 patients with glaucoma using each drug and then with the combination of drugs for four weeks each. Only patients with a morning intraocular pressure of at least 24 mm Hg without treatment were included. The patients were examined, after one and four weeks of treatment with pilocarpine, timolol, or combined timolol 0.5% and pilocarpine 4%, before the morning dose and at two and five hours after it. At the end of the study, the mean reduction in intraocular pressure from baseline was 9.2 +/- 5.1 mm Hg (28.5% +/- 12.7%) with combined timolol 0.5% and pilocarpine 4%, 5.6 +/- 3.6 mm Hg (17.6% +/- 9.7%) with pilocarpine, and 7.5 +/- 5.0 mm Hg (21.2% +/- 12.6%) with timolol. Intraocular pressure was consistently lower with the combination treatment than with timolol or pilocarpine alone. We believe that this combined solution of timolol-pilocarpine is a valuable contribution to the treatment of open-angle glaucoma.
Xerostomia complaint is very commonly associated to radioactive iodine therapy. Alternatives to treat this morbidity can offer better quality of life to patients with thyroid cancer submitted to adjuvant iodine therapy. AIM: to report on the experience with pilocarpine on the treatment of xerostomia in thyroid cancer patients submitted to adjuvant radioactive iodine therapy (RIT). MATERIALS AND METHODS: The five patients who met the inclusion criteria received 5mg of pilocarpine, 3 tid for one week. Side effects of the drug and subjective response to xerostomia complaints after treatment were evaluated. DESIGN: it is a prospective, non-randomized study. RESULTS: Sudoresis was the most frequent side effect of pilocarpine use, followed by fatigue and headache. Two patients reported relief of xerostomia using pilocarpine, but only one patient was able to tolerate the side effects. CONCLUSIONS: Pilocarpine seems to relieve xerostomia complaints in thyroid cancer patients because it is able to stimulate salivary flow, but the observed side effects made the patients refuse long-term therapy continuation.
In a controlled, double-observer, multicenter study, we compared the effect of a fixed combination of timolol 0.5%-pilocarpine 4% twice a day with that of timolol 0.5% twice a day plus pilocarpine 4% three times a day in 80 patients with open-angle glaucoma whose intraocular pressure was greater than 21 mm Hg on timolol 0.5% twice a day alone. Administered twice daily, the combination drug lowered intraocular pressure as effectively as concomitant treatment with timolol twice a day and pilocarpine three times a day. No statistically significant differences in reduction of intraocular pressure were found between the two groups nor were any unexpected side effects observed.
Although pilocarpine hydrochloride tablets are currently indicated for the treatment of xerostomia, their adverse effects are frequently reported. The development of a new, low-dose pilocarpine solution for topical oral-cavity use is needed. This article discusses a few clinical trials to formulate a topical low-dose solution of pilocarpine hydrochloride for the treatment of xerostomia and presents two low dose, stable formulations of pilocarpine topical spray that can improve the patient's quality of life with minimal adverse effects.
Vuity (pilocarpine HCL ophthalmic 1.25%) was approved for the treatment of presbyopia in October 2021. Previous case series have reported the presence of vitreofoveal traction and retinal detachment following pilocarpine administration, but this was not reported in the recent randomized control trials assessing the efficacy of Vuity. The authors report a case of a woman of 65 years who developed vitreomacular traction immediately following the first administration of Vuity, review the literature, and present considerations regarding screening and management of patients starting Vuity. [Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging Retina 2022; 53:410-411.].
