BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Atopic dermatitis (AD) primarily affects infants and young children. Although topical corticosteroids (TCSs) are often prescribed, noncorticosteroid treatments are needed because compliance with TCSs is poor due to concerns about their side effects. In this longest and largest intervention study ever conducted in infants with mild-to-moderate AD, pimecrolimus 1% cream (PIM) was compared with TCSs. METHODS: A total of 2418 infants were enrolled in this 5-year open-label study. Infants were randomized to PIM (n = 1205; with short-term TCSs for disease flares) or TCSs (n = 1213). The primary objective was to compare safety; the secondary objective was to document PIM's long-term efficacy. Treatment success was defined as an Investigator's Global Assessment score of 0 (clear) or 1 (almost clear). RESULTS: Both PIM and TCSs had a rapid onset of action with >50% of patients achieving treatment success by week 3. After 5 years, >85% and 95% of patients in each group achieved overall and facial treatment success, respectively. The PIM group required substantially fewer steroid days than the TCS group (7 vs 178). The profile and frequency of adverse events was similar in the 2 groups; in both groups, there was no evidence for impairment of humoral or cellular immunity. CONCLUSIONS: Long-term management of mild-to-moderate AD in infants with PIM or TCSs was safe without any effect on the immune system. PIM was steroid-sparing. The data suggest PIM had similar efficacy to TCS and support the use of PIM as a first-line treatment of mild-to-moderate AD in infants and children.
BACKGROUND: Atopic dermatitis is a prevalent condition in children and can be effectively managed with medications such as topical calcineurin inhibitors (pimecrolimus or tacrolimus). A key unresolved safety concern is whether use of topical calcineurin inhibitors is associated with cancer. We systematically reviewed the risk of cancer in patients with atopic dermatitis exposed to topical calcineurin inhibitors. METHODS: As part of the 2022 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology and American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters atopic dermatitis guidelines, we searched MEDLINE, Embase, the Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature database, the Indice Bibliografico Espanhol de Ciencias da Saude database, the Global Resource of Eczema Trials database, WHO's International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, the US Food and Drug Administration database, the European Medicines Agency database, company registers, and relevant citations from inception to June 6, 2022. We included randomised controlled trials and comparative and non-comparative non-randomised studies in any language addressing cancer risk in patients with atopic dermatitis using topical calcineurin inhibitors. We excluded split-body studies and studies with less than 3 weeks of follow-up. Paired reviewers independently screened records, extracted data, and assessed risk of bias in duplicate. We used Bayesian models to estimate the probability for cancer due to topical calcineurin inhibitor exposure and the GRADE approach to determine the certainty of the evidence. Patients, advocacy groups, and care providers set a priori thresholds of important effects. This study is registered with Open Science Framework, https://osf.io/v4bfc. FINDINGS: We identified and analysed 110 unique studies (52 randomised controlled trials and 69 non-randomised studies [11 were non-randomised study extensions of randomised controlled trials]) including 3.4 million patients followed up for a mean of 11 months (range 0.7-120). The absolute risk of any cancer with topical calcineurin inhibitor exposure was not different from controls (absolute risk 4.70 per 1000 with topical calcineurin inhibitors vs 4.56 per 1000 without; odds ratio 1.03 [95% credible interval 0.94-1.11]; moderate certainty). For all age groups and using data from observational studies and randomised controlled trials, the use of pimecrolimus (OR 1.05 [95% credible interval 0.94-1.15]) or tacrolimus (0.99 [0.89-1.09]) is likely to have had little to no association with cancer compared with no topical calcineurin inhibitor exposure. For pimecrolimus versus tacrolimus, the finding was similar (0.95 [95% credible interval 0.83-1.07]). Findings were similar in infants, children, and adults, and robust to trial sequential, subgroup, and sensitivity analyses. INTERPRETATION: Among individuals with atopic dermatitis, moderate-certainty evidence shows that topical calcineurin inhibitors do not increase the risk of cancer. These findings support the safe use of topical calcineurin inhibitors in the optimal treatment of patients with atopic dermatitis. FUNDING: American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology and American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology via the Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters.
Epidermolytic acanthomas (EA) are rare benign tumors of unclear etiology that present as flat, sometimes slightly keratotic, pale or whitish papules that are usually asymptomatic. Not uncommonly, their clinical appearance in the anogenital area might lead to misdiagnosis as other lesions that commonly develop at this site, such as condylomata acuminata. Though mainly asymptomatic, there are also reports of EA presenting with persistent genital pruritus. We describe the first reported case of pruritic scrotal EA successfully treated with topical pimecrolimus.
INTRODUCTION: Atopic dermatitis (AD) exhibits difference in immune polarization between Caucasians and Asian races due to which an evaluation of the efficacy and safety of Pimecrolimus (PIM) in Asian population is called for. The current study addresses the need via a sub-group analysis of the PETITE study (NCT00120523) to evaluate the safety and efficacy of PIM in Chinese infants. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients with AD (>/=3 months-<12 months of age) were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to either PIM 1% cream or topical corticosteroids (TCS). The primary endpoint was safety. The secondary endpoint was efficacy. RESULTS: 120 patients were randomized to either PIM 1% or TCS (n = 61 for PIM, n = 59 for TCS). The most often reported adverse events were reported by similar proportions of patients treated with PIM or TCS. There was a progressive increase in overall IGA treatment success in infants treated with PIM (82.9%, p < .05, 95% CI: 70.4, 95.3) after 26 weeks which was comparable to the TCS group (88.5%, p < .05, 95% CI: 79.8, 97.1). CONCLUSION: PIM showed an early and sustained efficacy in the Chinese sub-population with a substantial corticosteroid-sparing effect in patients with AD.
This systematic literature review (SLR) and meta-analysis assessed the efficacy and safety of pimecrolimus vs other topical treatments in patients with mild-to-moderate atopic dermatitis (AD), focusing on children and sensitive skin areas. An SLR was conducted in MEDLINE, Embase and Cochrane Library databases on January 15th, 2020, to identify randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with pimecrolimus as a study arm. Another SLR performed on October 5th, 2020 identified RCTs with a crisaborole study arm. Direct pair-wise meta-analysis was used to compare pimecrolimus with vehicle, tacrolimus or topical corticosteroids (TCS; n = 27 studies). Outcomes included Investigator's Global Assessment (IGA) score 0/1 up to week 6 and adverse events. Pimecrolimus was more efficacious than vehicle in achieving IGA 0/1 up to week 6 in children, and similar safety profiles were observed with pimecrolimus and vehicle in children and the mixed population, including on sensitive skin. No significant differences in efficacy and safety were observed between pimecrolimus and tacrolimus 0.03%. Efficacy and safety were similar for pimecrolimus and mild medium potency TCS; mildly potent steroids caused transient epidermal thinning in sensitive skin areas (not seen with pimecrolimus). Pimecrolimus can be considered as a first-line option for mild-to-moderate AD, particularly in children and sensitive skin areas.
Fox-Fordyce disease (FFD) is characterized by a pruritic eruption of skin-coloured or yellowish papules in areas rich in apocrine glands. The histology comprises dilatation of follicular infundibula with hyperkeratosis, acanthosis, and spongiosis of the infundibular epithelium with perifollicular infiltration of lymphocytes and foamy histiocytes. We treated a 12-year-old girl with FFD with topical pimecrolimus for 12 weeks, this resulted in a complete clearance of lesions. After the therapy, the patient was followed for an additional 19 months without signs of relapse. The effects of pimecrolimus in FFD might imply that an inflammatory process inducing secondary reactive hyperkeratosis could be involved in the pathogenesis of FFD.
Annular lichenoid dermatitis of youth, first described in 2003, is a rare and occasionally chronic skin disease. We report a case of annular lichenoid dermatitis of youth relapsing over the course of 5 years successfully treated and maintained with topical pimecrolimus cream.
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic and relapsing, inflammatory skin disease characterized by impaired skin barrier function and immune system dysregulation that results in dryness, skin microbiome dysbiosis and intense pruritus. It is highly heterogeneous, and its management is demanding. Patients with AD are at greater risk of comorbidities such as attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder as well as other atopic diseases. Early-onset AD cases typically improve or resolve in late childhood; however, it is proposed that the prevalence of persistent or adult-onset AD is higher than previously thought. Basic therapy consists of emollient application and trigger avoidance, and when insufficient, topical corticosteroids (TCS) are the first-line treatment. However, corticophobia/steroid aversion and TCS side-effects, particularly on sensitive skin areas, lead to low compliance and insufficient disease control. Several long- and short-term randomized controlled and daily practice studies have demonstrated that topical calcineurin inhibitors, such as pimecrolimus, have similar anti-inflammatory effects to low-to-medium strength TCS, reduce pruritus and improve the quality of life of patients. In addition, pimecrolimus does not cause skin atrophy, is steroid-sparing and has a good safety profile, with no evidence for an increased risk of malignancies or skin infections. In general, pimecrolimus cream is well-accepted and well-tolerated, encouraging patient adherence and leading to its use by many physicians as a preferred therapy for children and sensitive skin areas.
BACKGROUND: In the treatment of atopic dermatitis, pimecrolimus has high antipruritic effects. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the efficacy of 1% pimecrolimus cream in comparison to 1% hydrocortisone cream in non-atopic prurigo nodularis (PN). METHODS: A randomized, controlled, double-blind study with intraindividual randomization was done in 30 patients (17 females, 13 males; mean age 58.5 years) with PN. RESULTS: Pruritus intensity decreased significantly (p < 0.001) on both treated sides as early as after 10 days of treatment; scratch lesions improved (p < 0.001). Quality of life as assessed by the Dermatology Life Quality Index improved significantly. However, a significant advantage of pimecrolimus over hydrocortisone was not found. CONCLUSION: The results suggest that the non-steroid pimecrolimus is an effective alternative for PN treatment.
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a distressing dermatological disease, which is highly prevalent during infancy, can persist into later life and requires long-term management with anti-inflammatory compounds. The introduction of the topical calcineurin inhibitors (TCIs), tacrolimus and pimecrolimus, more than 10 yr ago was a major breakthrough for the topical anti-inflammatory treatment of AD. Pimecrolimus 1% is approved for second-line use in children (>/=2 yr old) and adults with mild-to-moderate AD. The age restriction was emphasized in a boxed warning added by the FDA in January 2006, which also highlights the lack of long-term safety data and the theoretical risk of skin malignancy and lymphoma. Since then, pimecrolimus has been extensively investigated in short- and long-term studies including over 4000 infants (<2 yr old). These studies showed that pimecrolimus effectively treats AD in infants, with sustained improvement with long-term intermittent use. Unlike topical corticosteroids, long-term TCI use does not carry the risks of skin atrophy, impaired epidermal barrier function or enhanced percutaneous absorption, and so is suitable for AD treatment especially in sensitive skin areas. Most importantly, the studies of pimecrolimus in infants provided no evidence for systemic immunosuppression, and a comprehensive body of evidence from clinical studies, post-marketing surveillance and epidemiological investigations does not support potential safety concerns. In conclusion, the authors consider that the labelling restrictions regarding the use of pimecrolimus in infants are no longer justified and recommend that the validity of the boxed warning for TCIs should be reconsidered.
INTRODUCTION: Pimecrolimus , a calcineurin inhibitor, is a non-steroidal treatment option in patients aged >/= 2 years with mild-to-moderate atopic eczema (AE). It was approved as a viable therapeutic option by the FDA in 2001 and in the European Union a year later in 2002. Calcineurin inhibitors inhibit the synthesis of inflammatory cytokines released from T cells and mast cells. In contrast to corticosteroids, calcineurin inhibitors act specifically on proinflammatory cells. Pimecrolimus shows comparative efficacy to mild topical corticosteroids and a special antipruritic effect. Furthermore, examinations of the systemic absorption of pimecrolimus implicated no systemic immunosuppression. In 2006, the FDA set a black box warning in the packaging materials of pimecrolimus alluding to the risk of skin malignancy or lymphomas due to theoretical consideration. AREAS COVERED: The authors provide a review of pimecrolimus as a treatment for AE. Specifically, the authors present the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic information on pimecrolimus and also review its efficacy. The authors also discuss pimecrolimus' safety and tolerability profile. EXPERT OPINION: Pimecrolimus represents a valuable part of active and proactive therapy in AE. That being said, the long-term safety of topical calcineurin inhibitors remains to be investigated. Given the results from experimental photocarcinogenicity studies, effective sun protection should be employed during the therapy, although an increased risk for skin malignancies and lymphomas was not found in recent studies. Pimecrolimus should be considered as an alternative therapeutic approach in AE treatment management going along with a corticoid-sparing effect.
An eight-year-old child presented with generalized popular eruptions of two years duration. The diagnosis was lichen nitidus with pathologic confirmation. The lesions were successfully reduced and flattened by pimecrolimus 1 percent cream for 8 weeks.
BACKGROUND: The search for new drugs capable of controlling the symptoms and signs of oral lichen planus (OLP) with minimal side-effects remains an important challenge. OBJECTIVE: A literature review is made to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of topical tacrolimus and pimecrolimus in the treatment of OLP. MATERIAL AND METHOD: A review was made of the studies published between 1999 and 2008 in relation to the topical application of tacrolimus and pimecrolimus in OLP. RESULTS: The data obtained point to the need for larger randomized, placebo-controlled studies with carefully selected and standardized endpoints, to allow adequate comparison between treatments. The adverse effects were fundamentally of a local nature, and in particular included burning sensation in the application zone. All the studies consulted found the treatment to be effective over short periods of time, with lesion recurrences after suppression of the drug. The long-term safety remains to be established. CONCLUSION: There is need for larger placebo-controlled, randomized studies with carefully selected and standardized outcome measures.
Forty-nine patients enrolled in a single-blinded, randomized, comparing 308-nm excimer laser therapy together with topical 1% pimecrolimus cream twice daily (group A) with excimer laser therapy twice per week (group B). Of 48 patients evaluated after 30 weeks of treatment, 71% of patients from group A achieved Grade 3 or 4 repigmentation compared with 50% in group B. Significant difference was found between group A and B at the end of 30 weeks of treatment (p = 0.001).
Initially called (in French) "Balanoposthite chronique circonscrite benigne a plasmocytes", Zoon's plasma cell balanitis is a chronic inflammatory dermatosis affecting the glans and foreskin of uncircumcised men. The different treatment options for this condition often present partial results. Reports have shown therapeutic success using topical tacrolimus. We report the use of pimecrolimus, a homologue of tacrolimus, with good response. Two male patients diagnosed with Zoon's plasma cell balanitis, confirmed by biopsy, were subjected to daily treatment with topical pimecrolimus1%. Significant improvement was noted in patient 1 after 6 weeks and after 8 weeks in patient 2. CONCLUSION: Pimecrolimus cream may be an option for the treatment of this disease.
Atopic dermatitis is an inflammatory, chronically relapsing, highly pruritic skin disorder that has considerable impact on the quality of life. As corticosteroids are not ideal for long-term control of the disease because of their potential side effects, steroid-free topical immunomodulators have recently been developed for the treatment of atopic dermatitis. Although clinical trials do not indicate an increased risk of cutaneous infection, the clinician must be careful about viral infections such as eczema herpeticum or molluscum eczema that can be observed during treatment with pimecrolimus and tacrolimus. We report molluscum contagiosum that developed on the preauricular area treated with topical pimecrolimus.
Pimecrolimus 1% cream is an effective, non-corticosteroid, topical anti-inflammatory treatment for atopic dermatitis (AD). The aim of this article was to review published clinical data that have examined how pimecrolimus can address the medical needs of AD patients. Clinical studies have demonstrated that early treatment with pimecrolimus decreases the progression to disease flares, rapidly improves pruritus and significantly enhances quality of life. Patients find the formulation easy to apply, which may result in improved adherence with the treatment regimen. Pimecrolimus, in contrast to topical corticosteroids (TCSs), does not induce skin atrophy or epidermal barrier dysfunction and is highly effective for the treatment of AD in sensitive skin areas. Furthermore, pimecrolimus reduces the incidence of skin infections compared with TCSs and is not associated with other TCS-related side effects such as striae, telangiectasia and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis suppression. An additional benefit of pimecrolimus is its substantial steroid sparing effect. On the basis of these data, a new treatment algorithm for patients with mild-to-moderate AD is proposed in which pimecrolimus is recommended as a first line therapy for patients with established mild AD at the first signs and symptoms of disease. Pimecrolimus is also recommended for mild-to-moderate AD after initial treatment with a TCS. After resolution of lesions, maintenance treatment with pimecrolimus may effectively prevent subsequent disease flares. In conclusion, the clinical profile of pimecrolimus suggests that it may be considered the drug of choice for the treatment of mild-to-moderate AD in children as well as adults and particularly in sensitive skin areas.
