In a double-blind trial the effects on ventilatory function (FEV1), heart rate and blood pressure of oral pirbuterol and oral salbutamol in various single doses were studied in ten patients with chronic asthma. Pirbuterol (15 mg) and salbutamol (4 mg) produced equal peak levels of bronchodilatation. There was no significant difference in the mean rise in heart rates caused by the two drugs, and no other significant side-effects were noted.
We compared the initial and long-term effects of the beta-adrenergic agonist pirbuterol in 12 patients with chronic congestive heart failure. The drug's initial effect was a 35 per cent increase in cardiac index, but there was no significant change in heart rate or mean arterial pressure. After one month of therapy, the mean cardiac index and ejection fraction had returned to base-line values, and no clinical effect was evident in most patients. This apparent tolerance was not accompanied by changes in heart rate, blood pressure, or body weight, and it occurred in the presence of therapeutic drug levels during long-term therapy. The density of beta-adrenergic receptors on lymphocytes from patients treated with pirbuterol was significantly depressed as compared with that of patients with heart failure of comparable severity but not treated with pirbuterol. We conclude that tolerance to the hemodynamic and clinical effects of pirbuterol develops during long-term administration; this tolerance may be related to a decrease in myocardial or vascular beta-adrenergic receptors or both.
In many patients with chronic bronchitis and emphysema right and left ventricular ejection fractions (RVEF and LVEF) are reduced. A study was conducted using multiple gated equilibrium radionuclide ventriculography to compare the effects of oral salbutamol 4 mg and pirbuterol 15 mg on cardiac function in 12 patients with chronic bronchitis (forced expiratory volume in one second 0.86 (SEM 0.12) 1; arterial oxygen pressure 8.2 (SEM 0.5) kPa (61.7 (SEM 3.8) mm Hg)). Different doses of nebulised salbutamol (500 microgram and 5 mg) were also compared in nine of the patients. Both oral salbutamol and oral pirbuterol produced significant increases in RVEF and LVEF at 60 and 90 minutes after drug ingestion (p less than 0.01 in each case). There were no significant differences between salbutamol and pirbuterol in their effects on RVEF and LVEF. Inhaled salbutamol at doses commonly prescribed had no significant effect on RVEF and LVEF after 20 and 60 minutes. Salbutamol and pirbuterol given by mouth have similar actions on RVEF and LVEF. Further studies are necessary to assess the effects of long term B2 agonists in this group of patients.
The effects of single oral doses of pirbuterol 10 mg plus hydroxyzine 10 mg, and of pirbuterol 10 mg plus placebo, were compared in a single-blind cross-over trial in 17 adult patients with reversible airway obstruction. The initial bronchodilator response after the two treatments was similar, but mean specific airway conductance at 3, 4, 6 and 8 h, and mean FEV1 and FVC after 3 and 4 hours, were significantly higher after pirbuterol + hydroxyzine than after pirbuterol + placebo. The mean thoracic gas volume measured at 3 and 4 h was lower after pirbuterol + hydroxyzine. Heart rate, blood pressure and a continuous ECG record did not differ after the two treatments. The findings suggest that the combination of pirbuterol and hydroxyzine brings about more prolonged bronchodilatation in patients with reversible airway obstruction than does pirbuterol alone.
In a controlled clinical crossover trial, the therapeutic effect of pirbuterol (CAS 38677-81-5) in the Autohaler was compared to that of salbutamol in a customary metered-dose aerosol in 17 children with asthma. Each child was randomized to both treatments with a washout period of at least 1 day and at most 13 days. Ten children commenced with salbutamol and then switched over to pirbuterol, and the other 7 vice versa. The main criterion to evaluate efficacy was the forced expiratory volume after 1 s (FEV1). Other efficacy criteria were forced vital capacity (FVC) and peak expiratory flow (PEF). The patients were given detailed instructions on how to use the inhalers. Each treatment was applied in the morning with one shot (0.2 mg pirbuterol or 0.1 mg salbutamol). FEV1, FVC and PEF were measured in all patients 10 min before and 10 min after medication with the whole-body plethysmograph; further measurements were carried out in most patients 60 and 240 min after application. There was a mean increase of 47% in the FEV1 compared to baseline with pirbuterol in the Autohaler compared to a mean increase of only 30% with salbutamol in the customary metered-dose inhaler. The difference is statistically significant (p = 0.036). A linear crossover analysis showed a significant treatment effect 10 min after application in favour of pirbuterol with no significant period effects or interactions (p = 0.020). The increases of FVC and PEF after pirbuterol treatment were also remarkably higher than after salbutamol. No side effects were observed.
Pirbuterol hydrochloride has been assayed in alkaline medium by using a fluorometric method to measure fluorescence intensity at 372 nm with excitation at 310 nm and by the delta A method at 242 nm. The linearity ranges are 0.5-4 micrograms/mL and 10-50 micrograms/mL, respectively. An authentic pirbuterol HCl sample was analyzed by nonaqueous potentiometric titration using 0.1N perchloric acid, and the results were compared with those for fluorometric and delta A methods. The mean percent recoveries for the authentic sample were 98.72 +/- 1.13 and 99.24 +/- 0.85, respectively. When applied to commercial capsules containing 10 mg and 15 mg each, the fluorometric method gave mean percent recoveries of 101.11 +/- 1.05 and 98.12 +/- 0.93; the delta A method gave mean percent recoveries of 100.57 +/- 0.83 and 97.80 +/- 0.75, respectively.
Rest and exercise hemodynamics with the beta agonist pirbuterol and a placebo preparation were studied in seven patients with severe chronic congestive heart failure. At rest, pirbuterol increased cardiac index (1.8 +/- 0.3 to 2.3 +/- 0.4 L/min/M2, p less than 0.01) and decreased systemic vascular resistance (1899 +/- 405 to 1419 +/- 257 dynes-sec-cm-5, p less than 0.01) without a significant change in heart rate, right atrial, pulmonary arterial, pulmonary arterial wedge, or systemic arterial pressures. Although there were slight increases in cardiac index at peak exercise with pirbuterol, neither total exercise time nor peak oxygen consumption were improved with this agent. No significant hemodynamic changes occurred with placebo at rest, nor was there improvement in exercise performance following placebo. Of three patients studied at six weeks, two showed total loss of hemodynamic effect of pirbuterol compared to the acute response. In conclusion, although acute rest hemodynamics improve with pirbuterol, the lack of improved acute exercise performance and the decrease in hemodynamic responsivity at six weeks appear to limit its usefulness in the treatment of heart failure.
This single-center, double-blind, randomized study compared the efficacy and safety of single-dose pirbuterol aerosol (0.2 mg and 0.4 mg) with metaproterenol (1.3 mg) and placebo aerosols. Twenty-four patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) completed this crossover design study. Statistically significant improvement over placebo (p less than 0.05 to p less than 0.001) was noted for pirbuterol 0.2 mg and 0.4 mg in FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 second) duration, peak, and area under the curve (AUC) responses, and in maximum midexpiratory flow rate (MMEF) peak and AUC responses. Pirbuterol at both the 0.2 mg and 0.4 mg doses demonstrated statistically significant improvements in pulmonary function tests and clinical assessment over metaproterenol 1.3 mg. Both drugs were well-tolerated and neither drug increased cardiac ectopy, as measured on 5-h Holter monitor tapes.
The acute pulmonary and cardiovascular effects of pirbuterol dihydrochloride 10 mg and 15 mg, a new orally active beta 2-selective sympathomimetic agent, were compared with those of placebo and metaproterenol 20 mg over a period of seven hours in 24 stable asthmatics. Pirbuterol 15 mg and metaproterenol 20 mg had a comparable onset of action (30 min) and magnitude of peak bronchodilator effect (29 +/- 5 mean % increase in FEV1) but the bronchodilatation following pirbuterol was longer lasting (seven hours) than that following metaproterenol (three hours). Pirbuterol 15 mg also caused a greater magnitude and duration of bronchodilatation than pirbuterol 10 mg. No effect on heart rate or PEP/LVET ratio was noted with either drug. Side effects reported following each of the active agents were comparable in frequency and were almost always mild. These findings indicate that pirbuterol is an effective bronchodilator with a relatively long duration of action, definite beta 2-adrenergic specificity and insignificant toxicity when administered in a single dose.
In 20 patients with severe congestive heart failure (CHF), we studied the effects of the beta-adrenergic agonist pirbuterol compared to placebo in both an acute double-blind randomized trial and after long-term treatment. Acutely, pirbuterol patients (n = 10) demonstrated a significant rise in cardiac index (2.2 +/- 0.14 to 3.2 +/- 0.32 L/min/m2), stroke index (26 +/- 2.6 to 35 +/- 2.9 ml/beat/m2), stroke work index (22 +/- 2.4 to 30 +/- 2.7 gm X m/m2), and ejection fraction (22 +/- 4 to 30 +/- 5%). These hemodynamic variables did not significantly change in placebo patients (n = 10). After 3 weeks of pirbuterol therapy, 14 patients (70%) were symptomatically improved and were continued on the drug for another 3 weeks; 13 of 14 patients who were symptomatically improved underwent restudy. Compared to pretreatment baseline, there was continued improvement in cardiac index (2.5 +/- 0.16 to 3.2 +/- 0.24 L/min/m2), stroke index (30 +/- 2.5 to 38 +/- 2.9 ml/beat/m2), stroke work index (26 +/- 2.3 to 35 +/- 3.1 gm X m/m2), and ejection fraction (24 +/- 1 to 28 +/- 4%). Patients more frequently improved were those with nonischemic cardiomyopathy and those with higher initial ejection fractions. These results demonstrate the acute beneficial effects of oral pirbuterol versus placebo in a double-blind randomized trial. Improvement was maintained during long-term therapy in the majority of CHF patients.
OBJECTIVE OF THE STUDY: To determine the maximal bronchodilator dose of procaterol and pirbuterol administered by inhalation with an without an aerochamber (Aerocamera) to children with acute bronchial asthma attacks. TYPE OF STUDY: Prospective. 18 children (6-15 years of age) with acute bronchial asthma attacks (FEV1 < 80% of the predicted value) received pirbuterol (N = 10) or procaterol (N = 8) by metered-dose inhaler, one puff every 5 minutes, for a total of five doses. During another acute attack, the same patient received the same medication with the aid of a spacer (Aerocamera). Clinical evaluation and pulmonary function tests were performed 5 minutes after each inhaled dose. RESULTS: For both drugs, maximal bronchodilation was obtained after the second dose. No significant side effects were observed even after procaterol doses of 50 micrograms or pirbuterol doses of 1000 micrograms. The results were unaffected by the use of the spacer. CONCLUSIONS: The doses that induced maximal bronchodilation were 400 micrograms pirbuterol and 20 micrograms procaterol. Although the spacer did not change the results, it is a valuable aid for patients who have difficulty in using the metered-dose inhaler (M.D.I.).
We studied the acute and long-term effect of the oral beta-2 agonist pirbuterol on pulmonary hemodynamics and right and left ventricular ejection fractions in 11 patients with stable hypoxic chronic bronchitis and emphysema who were maintained on long-term oxygen therapy. We have used a double-blind study with random allocation of patients to receive either pirbuterol or an identical-appearing placebo. Six patients received 15 mg pirbuterol thrice daily, and five patients received a similar placebo thrice daily, over a 6-month period. The first 15-mg dose of pirbuterol by mouth at the beginning of the study raised the heart rate from 84 +/- 13 to 100 +/- 16 beats/min (mean +/- SD) (p less than 0.01), and cardiac output from 5.2 +/- 0.9 to 6.4 +/- 0.8 L/min (p less than 0.01) and right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF) from 0.28 +/- 0.10 to 0.33 +/- 0.12 (p less than 0.01) within 120 min after receiving the drug, but without significant change in the mean pulmonary arterial pressure. None of these variables changed significantly after an acute dose of placebo in another four patients. Repeated measurements after 6 months of chronic oral therapy with either pirbuterol or placebo showed that 16 h after the last 15-mg oral dose of pirbuterol or placebo, the heart rate, mean pulmonary arterial pressure, cardiac output, total pulmonary vascular resistance, and RVEF were all not significantly different from the values 6 months previously, before receiving either pirbuterol or the placebo.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
In this double blind study, the cardiovascular and hypokalaemic effects of equal doses of inhaled pirbuterol and salbutamol were compared in eight healthy volunteers. Increasing doses of 200, 400, 600 and 800 micrograms (total dose 2000 micrograms) were given from a metered dose inhaler at 15 min intervals, followed by measurement of heart rate, blood pressure, total electromechanical systole (QS2I) (as a measure of inotropic response) and plasma potassium (K+) concentration 15 min after each inhalation. After inhalation of the highest concentration, salbutamol resulted in a greater increase in heart rate (10.5 bpm vs 4.4 bpm, p less than 0.0007), and reduction in QS2I (-25.4 ms vs -9.6 ms, p less than 0.0001) than pirbuterol. There were no significant differences in changes in systolic blood pressure (1.9 mmHg vs 6 mmHg, p = 0.27), diastolic blood pressure (-5.8 mmHg vs -3.9 mmHg, p = 0.64) or plasma K+ (-0.21 mmol/L vs -0.15 mmol/L, p = 0.57). We conclude that the new beta-2 adrenergic agonist pirbuterol is at least as beta-2 selective as salbutamol when administered by repeated inhalation in healthy volunteers.
The metabolic, hormonal and haemodynamic effects of oral pirbuterol, a new beta 2-adrenoceptor agonist, were studied acutely (n = 19) and after 3 months treatment (n = 11) in patients with severe heart failure receiving chronic frusemide therapy. In the acute study fasted patients (n = 10) showed reductions in plasma K+ (P less than 0.005) and cortisol (P less than 0.01) and increases in plasma glucose (P less than 0.005), insulin (P less than 0.01), lactate (P less than 0.005) and pyruvate (P less than 0.0025). These acute changes were less in unfasted subjects (n = 9). Maximal increase in stroke volume occurred at approximately half the plasma pirbuterol concentration required for maximal effect on plasma insulin. Treatment with pirbuterol for 3 months was associated with sustained increases in stroke volume and fasting plasma glucose and insulin, but there was loss of all other acute metabolic effects. Despite concurrent frusemide and digoxin therapy acute hypokalaemia caused no adverse effects. Hypokalaemia did not occur with chronic pirbuterol administration.
Pirbuterol (PB), an oral beta-adrenergic-receptor agonist, has the pharmacologic effects of vasodilation and positive inotropy. The present studies were undertaken to determine the value of PB in the long-term therapy of chronic cardiac failure. A double-blind, randomized, 7-week trial comparing PB (20 mg three times daily) with placebo in 12 patients was followed by 12 weeks of open PB therapy. Dose-dependent nervousness and tremulousness limited the unit PB dose to less than 20 mg in six patients. In all patients, clinical status, exercise tolerance and maximal oxygen uptake, left ventricular echocardiographic dimension and cardiothoracic ratio were unchanged from control after 7 weeks of placebo or PB or after 12--19 weeks of PB. To assess the adequacy of 20 mg of PB, the dose-response relations of cardiocirculatory effects to 10, 15, 20 and 30 mg of PB were compared in seven of the above patients and nine other patients. Cardiac output was significantly elevated and wedge pressure reduced after all four doses, but these changes were sustained from 6 hours after 20- and 30-mg doses only. Thus, the role of PB in the management of chronic cardiac failure appears limited; judgment of its utility must await the results of additional controlled trials.
The preferred form of acute bronchodilator therapy is to administer aerosolized beta-agonist by a metered-dose inhaler. Many patients cannot use this device efficiently, the major problem being coordination of dose release with inspiration. A new breath-actuated inhaler (the Autohaler actuator) has been developed to overcome this problem. The objective of this study was to evaluate patient's and staff's perceptions of this device. Ninety-eight percent of patients rated the device easy to use and 83% rated the overall use as excellent or good. The staffs rated it as excellent or good for 93% of patients. It was concluded that patients would accept this device, and greater patient compliance could be realized.
