Hypokalemia plus elevated carbon dioxide (CO2) content usually indicates renal or gastrointestinal potassium (K+) loss. Hypokalemia plus decreased CO2 content usually means intestinal K+ loss. Hyperkalemia is common in metabolic acidosis and oliguric renal failure. With hemolysis or thrombocytosis, serum K+ concentration may be elevated while plasma concentration is normal. A CO2 value less than 18 mmole/liter suggests metabolic acidosis; a value greater than 30 mmole/liter suggests metabolic alkalosis.
OBJECTIVE: To describe effectiveness of funic potassium chloride (KCl) injection for fetal demise during intact dilation and evacuation (D&E). STUDY DESIGN: We abstracted medical records of patients who underwent standard or intact D&E to identify those who had intact D&E from 20 weeks 0 days through 23 weeks 6 days from February 2016 to August 2017 at one academic center. We extracted data on time to asystole following KCl injection, as well as incidents including hemorrhage, infection, uterine perforation, and unplanned admissions for up to 6 months following each procedure. RESULTS: Of 57 procedures, 32 (56%) were intact. Median time from KCl injection to fetal asystole was 48 seconds (interquartile range [IQR] 34-100). Median time to asystole at weeks 20 and 21 (46 seconds [IQR 34-60 seconds]) did not differ significantly from weeks 22 and 23 (85 seconds [IQR 34-200 seconds]), p = 0.15. Asystole occurred in less than four minutes in all cases but one. No adverse events occurred with either the funic KCl injections or the intact D&E procedures. CONCLUSION: Funic KCl injection for intact D&E usually causes fetal asystole in less than 4 minutes. IMPLICATIONS: Funic KCl injection under direct visualization is a feasible method to induce fetal asystole at the time of intact dilation and evacuation.
BACKGROUND: Thiazide diuretics (TD) are the first-line treatment of hypertension because of its consistent benefit in lowering blood pressure and cardiovascular risk. TD is also known to cause an excess risk of diabetes, which may limit long-term use. Although potassium (K) depletion was thought to be the main mechanism of TD-induced hyperglycemia, TD also triggers magnesium (Mg) depletion. However, the role of Mg supplementation in modulating metabolic side effects of TD has not been investigated. Therefore, we aim to determine the effect of potassium magnesium citrate (KMgCit) on fasting plasma glucose and liver fat by magnetic resonance imaging during TD therapy. METHODS: Accordingly, we conducted a double-blinded RCT in 60 nondiabetic hypertension patients to compare the effects of KCl versus KMgCit during chlorthalidone treatment. Each patient received chlorthalidone alone for 3 weeks before randomization. Primary end point was the change in fasting plasma glucose after 16 weeks of KCl or KMgCit supplementation from chlorthalidone alone. RESULTS: The mean age of subjects was 59+/-11 years (30% Black participants). Chlorthalidone alone induced a significant rise in fasting plasma glucose, and a significant fall in serum K, serum Mg, and 24-hour urinary citrate excretion (all P<0.05). KMgCit attenuated the rise in fasting plasma glucose by 7.9 mg/dL versus KCl (P<0.05), which was not observed with KCl. There were no significant differences in liver fat between the 2 groups. CONCLUSIONS: KMgCit is superior to KCl, the common form of K supplement used in clinical practice, in preventing TD-induced hyperglycemia. This action may improve tolerability and cardiovascular safety in patients with hypertension treated with this drug class.
Gliomas, the most lethal tumours in brain, have a poor prognosis despite accepting standard treatment. Limited benefits from current therapies can be attributed to genetic, epigenetic and microenvironmental cues that affect cell programming and drive tumour heterogeneity. Through the analysis of Hi-C data, we identified a potassium-chloride co-transporter SLC12A5 associated with disrupted topologically associating domain which was downregulated in tumour tissues. Multiple independent glioma cohorts were included to analyse the characterization of SLC12A5 and found it was significantly associated with pathological features, prognostic value, genomic alterations, transcriptional landscape and drug response. We constructed two SLC12A5 overexpression cell lines to verify the function of SLC12A5 that suppressed tumour cell proliferation and migration in vitro. In addition, SLC12A5 was also positively associated with GABA(A) receptor activity and negatively associated with pro-tumour immune signatures and immunotherapy response. Collectively, our study provides a comprehensive characterization of SLC12A5 in glioma and supports SLC12A5 as a potential suppressor of disease progression.
BACKGROUND: Administration of the wrong drug via the epidural or intrathecal route can cause devastating consequences. Because of the commonality of potassium replacement therapy coupled to its potential neurotoxic profile, we suspected that injuries related to this drug error would be present in the literature. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to identify clinical characteristics associated with the inadvertent administration of potassium chloride (KCl) during neuraxial anesthesia. Our secondary objective was to identify human factors that may have been associated. EVIDENCE REVIEW: Published reports of neuraxial administration of KCl in humans were searched using Medline and Google Scholar. Error reports in any language were included. FINDINGS: 25 case reports/series reported administration of KCl via epidural (25 patients) or intrathecal routes (three patients). There were six cases during interventional pain procedures, five cases in operating rooms and 17 in wards or intensive care units. Neuraxial KCl caused paraplegia in 22 patients. Mechanical ventilation was instituted in 11 of 28 patients. Three patients died. Epidural (eight patients) and spinal (two patients) lavage were performed to minimize consequences. A correctly prepared KCl infusion was connected to the epidural catheter for nine patients on wards (32%; 95% upper confidence limit: 48%) due to epidural-intravenous line confusion. Among the other 19 errors, KCl was confused with normal saline for 13 patients or local anesthetic in three patients. A wide range of concentrations and doses of KCl were administered. Variable use of intravenous steroid (13 patients) and epidural saline (eight patients) was found among patients who received epidural KCl. Human factors identified included incorrect visual perception, inadequate monitoring of infusions and substandard practice related to neuraxial anesthesia or analgesia. CONCLUSIONS: KCl administration via epidural or intrathecal route has been reported to cause catastrophic consequences.
Aqueous salt solutions containing NaCl, KCl, MgCl2, Na2SO4, CaCl2, NH4Cl, or sodium saccharin are mutagenic in yeast when logarithmic growth of cells is interrupted by exposure to a 0.5-2.0 M salt solution. Stationary-phase cells are not mutated by this treatment. When placed in an enriched medium with the salt, the stationary-phase cells grow after a prolonged lag period. The compounds tested (NaCl, KCl, and sodium saccharin), under conditions in which growth in medium can take place, exhibit an antimutagenic response as measured by the compartmentalization test. The antimutagenic action of salt solutions in yeast is concentration-dependent. Unlike the mutagenic action of these compounds, which approximates an osmolality-dependent response, the antimutagenic action seems to be correlated with toxicity as measured by growth rate reduction at increasing concentrations of the compounds. For example, sodium saccharin and NaCl exhibit almost identical osmolalities; however, 0.3 M sodium saccharin reduces the growth rate much more than does 0.3 M NaCl. At these same molar concentrations, the spontaneous mutation rate for histidine prototrophy is, for the control, 6.2 x 10(-8) mutations/cell/-generation, 3.5 x 10(-8) with 0.3 M NaCl, and 1.7 x 10(-8) with 0.3 M sodium saccharin.
Three cases of intestinal obstruction due to solitary localized ulceration, inflammation and stenosis of the small bowel are described. All three patients had been treated with a pill containing hydrochlorothiazide and an enteric-coated centre of potassium chloride. The occurrence of this lesion in these patients, and in similar cases reported from other centres, suggests that such a combination should not be prescribed.
Potassium-chloride cotransporters KCC1 to KCC4 mediate the coupled export of potassium and chloride across the plasma membrane and play important roles in cell volume regulation, auditory system function, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine-mediated inhibitory neurotransmission. Here, we present 2.9- to 3.6-A resolution structures of full-length human KCC2, KCC3, and KCC4. All three KCCs adopt a similar overall architecture, a domain-swap dimeric assembly, and an inward-facing conformation. The structural and functional studies reveal that one unexpected N-terminal peptide binds at the cytosolic facing cavity and locks KCC2 and KCC4 at an autoinhibition state. The C-terminal domain (CTD) directly interacts with the N-terminal inhibitory peptide, and the relative motions between the CTD and the transmembrane domain (TMD) suggest that CTD regulates KCCs' activities by adjusting the autoinhibitory effect. These structures provide the first glimpse of full-length structures of KCCs and an autoinhibition mechanism among the amino acid-polyamine-organocation transporter superfamily.
The physical and chemical compatibility of enalaprilat in admixtures of dobutamine, dopamine, heparin, nitroglycerin, potassium chloride, or sodium nitroprusside, in 5% dextrose, were studied at room temperature over a 24-h period. Enalaprilat was found to be physically compatible and chemically stable in all admixture solutions tested.
