AIMS: Intravenous procainamide and amiodarone are drugs of choice for well-tolerated ventricular tachycardia. However, the choice between them, even according to Guidelines, is unclear. We performed a multicentre randomized open-labelled study to determine the safety and efficacy of intravenous procainamide and amiodarone for the acute treatment of tolerated wide QRS complex (probably ventricular) tachycardia. METHODS AND RESULTS: Patients were randomly assigned to receive intravenous procainamide (10 mg/kg/20 min) or amiodarone (5 mg/kg/20 min). The primary endpoint was the incidence of major predefined cardiac adverse events within 40 min after infusion initiation. Of 74 patients included, 62 could be analysed. The primary endpoint occurred in 3 of 33 (9%) procainamide and 12 of 29 (41%) amiodarone patients (odd ratio, OR = 0.1; 95% confidence interval, CI 0.03-0.6; P = 0.006). Tachycardia terminated within 40 min in 22 (67%) procainamide and 11 (38%) amiodarone patients (OR = 3.3; 95% CI 1.2-9.3; P = 0.026). In the following 24 h, adverse events occurred in 18% procainamide and 31% amiodarone patients (OR: 0.49; 95% CI: 0.15-1.61; P: 0.24). Among 49 patients with structural heart disease, the primary endpoint was less common in procainamide patients (3 [11%] vs. 10 [43%]; OR: 0.17; 95% CI: 0.04-0.73, P = 0.017). CONCLUSIONS: This study compares for the first time in a randomized design intravenous procainamide and amiodarone for the treatment of the acute episode of sustained monomorphic well-tolerated (probably) ventricular tachycardia. Procainamide therapy was associated with less major cardiac adverse events and a higher proportion of tachycardia termination within 40 min.
Organophosphorus nerve agent (OPNA) adducts to butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) can be applied to confirm exposure in humans. A sensitive method for generic detection of G- and V-series OPNA adducts to BChE in plasma was developed by combining an improved procainamide-gel separation (PGS) and pepsin digestion protocol with ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS). Residual matrix interferences from prior PGS purification of OPNA-BChE adducts from plasma were found to be a critical cause of significantly reduced UHPLC-MS/MS detection sensitivity. In our developed on-column PGS approach, the matrix interference was successfully removed by adding an appropriate concentration of NaCl to the washing buffer, and it could capture >/=92.5% of the BChE in plasma. The lower pH value and the longer digestion time in all previous pepsin digestion methods were found to be a key accelerated aging factor of several adducts such as tabun (GA)-, cyclohexylsarin (GF)-, and soman (GD)-BChE nonapeptide adducts, making them difficult to detect. The aging event of several OPNA-BChE nonapeptide adducts was so successfully addressed that the formic acid level in enzymatic buffer and digestion time were lowered to 0.05% (pH 2.67) and 0.5 h, respectively, and the post-digestion reaction was immediately terminated. The improved condition parameters were optimal for pepsin digestion of all types of OPNA-BChE adducts into their individual unaged nonapeptide adducts with the highest yields, expanding the applicability of the method. The method had a nearly one-fold decrease in sample preparation time through the reduction of digestion time and removal of ultrafiltration procedure after digestion. The limit of identification (LOI) were determined respectively as 0.13 ng mL(-1), 0.28 ng mL(-1), 0.50 ng mL(-1), 0.41 ng mL(-1) and 0.91 ng mL(-1) for VX-, sarin (GB)-, GA-, GF-, and GD-exposed human plasma, being low exposure value compared to previously documented approaches. The approach was utilized to fully characterize the adducted (aged and unaged) BChE levels of five OPNAs in a series of their individual exposed concentration (1.00-400 nM) of plasma sample, and successfully detect OPNA exposure from all unknown plasma samples from OPCW's second and third biomedical proficiency tests. The OPNA-BChE adducts, their aged adducts, and unadducted BChE from OPNA-exposed plasma can simultaneously be measured using the method. The study provides a recommended diagnostic tool for generic verification of any OPNA exposure with high confidence by detecting its corresponding BChE adduct.
Procainamide is a sodium channel blocker which prolongs QRS and QTc intervals, yet its major active metabolite, N-acetylprocainamide (NAPA), generally prolongs only QTc and has very different electrophysiologic and antiarrhythmic actions. In greater than 50% of patients receiving chronic treatment with procainamide, plasma concentrations of NAPA exceed those of procainamide. In this study, we examined the hypothesis that NAPA might alter the disposition kinetics or pharmacologic actions of procainamide. Ten patients with frequent ventricular extrasystoles received intravenous (i.v.) infusions of procainamide alone (study day 1), procainamide and NAPA (study day 2), and NAPA alone (study day 3) at least 48 h apart. On study days 1 and 2, procainamide was administered at a constant rate for 4 h. On study days 2 and 3, NAPA was administered as a loading and maintenance infusion designed to reach a target pseudo-equilibrium plasma concentration of 8 micrograms/ml. NAPA increased procainamide elimination half-life (t1/2) from 275 +/- 42 min (mean +/- SD) on day 1 to 340 +/- 74 min on day 2 (p less than 0.01). A significant correlations was noted between the change in procainamide total clearance on day 2 relative to day 1 and the initial procainamide total clearance on day 1 (r = -0.77, p = 0.009). Findings were similar when procainamide fractional urinary excretion was considered (r = -0.89, p = 0.007). NAPA did not alter procainamide-induced QRS prolongation, but potentiated procainamide-induced QTc prolongation. The antiarrhythmic response to procainamide was not significantly altered by NAPA in seven of nine patients. One patient had greater arrhythmia suppression when NAPA and procainamide were combined than when either was administered alone. In one patient, NAPA apparently antagonized procainamide-induced arrhythmia suppression, but this effect was not reproducible. We conclude that accumulation of NAPA during procainamide therapy can alter both procainamide elimination as well as its electrophysiologic actions.
The development of cardiac arrhythmias in the intensive care unit is common and associated with poor prognoses and outcomes. Because of the complexity of patients admitted to the intensive care unit, the management of arrhythmias is often difficult and may require multiple therapeutic interventions. In order for clinicians to appropriately manage arrhythmias, a thorough understanding of all available therapies, including intravenous antiarrhythmic agents, is essential. Suitable antiarrhythmic agents for use in the critical care setting include amiodarone, lidocaine, and procainamide. While these agents can be effective in managing cardiac arrhythmias, they also possess significant disadvantages and require additional monitoring during use. Therapy with these agents is often complicated because of the presence of significant associated adverse effects, clinician unfamiliarity, variable dosing strategies, and the potential for drug-drug interactions. The purpose of this review is to discuss indications and strategies for safe and effective use of amiodarone, lidocaine, and procainamide.
Drug-induced systemic lupus erythematosus arises from toxic side-effects of administration of hydralazine, isoniazid, procainamide and practolol. Hydralazine and isoniazid are nucleophilic drugs and inhibit the covalent binding reaction of complement components, C3 and C4, an effect likely to lead to deposition of immune complexes (a feature of systemic lupus erythematosus). Procainamide and practolol do not themselves inhibit C3 and C4. A range of metabolites and putative metabolites of procainamide and practolol were synthesized, and tested for their ability to inhibit the covalent binding reactions of C3 and C4. The highly nucleophilic hydroxylamine metabolite of procainamide was strongly inhibitory in both tests, as was a putative hydroxylamine metabolite of practolol. These studies indicate a potential role for the hydroxylamine metabolites in mediating the toxic side-effects of procainamide and practolol, and emphasize the need for adequate measurements of hydroxylamine metabolites in human tissue.
Hypersensitivity reactions to procainamide involving liver dysfunction are rare. We describe a patient who developed liver dysfunction after procainamide administration, manifested by fever, jaundice, elevated bilirubin concentration, and alkaline phosphatase concentration. Hepatobiliary scintigraphy demonstrated good hepatic uptake of the radionuclide without movement from hepatic parenchyma. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of procainamide-induced intrahepatic cholestasis as demonstrated by radionuclide hepatobiliary scintigraphy.
The chronic use of procainamide is associated with a high incidence of drug-induced lupus and also agranulocytosis. We have previously demonstrated that procainamide is metabolized in the liver to reactive hydroxylamine (PAHA) and nitroso (nitroso-PA) metabolites which covalently bind to protein and are toxic to lymphocytes. We proposed that these metabolites were responsible for the toxicities of procainamide. However, PAHA and nitroso-PA do not appear to escape the liver in significant concentrations. In this paper we describe the metabolism of procainamide to a reactive hydroxylamine by neutrophils and mononuclear leukocytes. Such metabolism only occurs if the cells have been stimulated to have a respiratory burst. These observations have obvious possible implications for the mechanism of procainamide-induced agranulocytosis (formation of a reactive metabolite by neutrophils) and procainamide-induced lupus (formation of a reactive metabolite by monocytes). The metabolism of drugs to reactive metabolites by monocytes may be a general mechanism for hypersensitivity reactions because monocytes play a key role in the processing of antigen and stimulation of antibody synthesis.
To compare the individual and combined electrophysiological effects of amiodarone and procainamide, 35 patients with sustained ventricular arrhythmias underwent programmed stimulation in the control state, after procainamide (mean concentration, 8.7 +/- 2.8 micrograms/ml), after 13 +/- 2 days of amiodarone (1,400 mg/day x 7 days, then 400 mg/day), and after amiodarone with procainamide (mean procainamide concentration, 7.8 +/- 2.2 micrograms/ml). Sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) was inducible in all 35 patients during treatment with procainamide alone and with amiodarone alone. Procainamide and amiodarone similarly increased the VT cycle length (+68 vs. +61 msec), the corrected QT interval (+63 vs. +49 msec), and the ventricular effective refractory period measured at paced cycle lengths of 600-550 msec (+23 vs. +21 msec) and 400 msec (+25 vs. +23 msec). Procainamide had a more pronounced effect on QRS duration than amiodarone during sinus rhythm (+18 vs. +8 msec, p less than 0.01) and during paced cycle lengths of 600-550 msec (+32 vs. +23 msec, p less than 0.01) and 400 msec (+37 vs. +28 msec, p less than 0.1) but a similar effect on the QRS duration during VT (+32 vs. +29 msec). During combination therapy, VT initiation was prevented in only two (6%) patients. The combination therapy produced a greater increase (p less than 0.001) than individual therapy in all the electrophysiological intervals assessed, with the exception of the sinus cycle length. On each drug regimen, a cycle length-dependent increase (p less than 0.05) in paced QRS duration was noted (400 more than 600-550 msec).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
A 42-year-old male developed thrombocytopenia and anemia along with agranulocytosis during treatment with procainamide. Bone marrow hypoplasia was evident on biopsy, and the patient was without evidence of systemic lupus erythematosis. He had prompt marrow recovery on drug withdrawal. While procainamide-induced agranulocytosis has been reported on a number of occasions, this is only the second case of pancytopenia.
We describe a case of procainamide-induced respiratory failure in a myasthenic patient with no prior history of respiratory weakness. Respiratory failure was induced secondary to procainamide alone since no N-acetyl-procainamide level was detectable. The patient's strength rapidly improved and he was successfully extubated 12 h after the offending dose.
A study was conducted to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of procainamide and its active metabolite, N-acetylprocainamide (NAPA), as a function of dose and formulation and to characterize the relationship between ventricular premature depolarization (VPD) rate and plasma concentrations of procainamide and NAPA. A subset of patients (n = 43) with frequent VPD who were enrolled in a double-blind, multicenter, activity trial were assigned in randomized fashion to receive 1 of 4 dose levels (placebo or 1,000, 2,000, or 4,000 mg/day procainamide) and to receive Procanbid (Parke-Davis) tablets every 12 hours or Procan SR (Parke-Davis) tablets every 6 hours during the first week of a blinded crossover phase. Patients crossed over to the alternative formulation after one week. Maximum and steady-state average concentrations of procainamide and NAPA after administration of Procanbid tablets were equivalent to those after administration of an equivalent daily dose of Procan SR tablets. Corresponding trough concentrations of procainamide were lower after administration of Procanbid tablets than after administration of Procan SR tablets. Both formulations produced disproportionate increases in procainamide concentrations with increasing dose; concentrations of NAPA increased in proportion to dose. Assessment of the relationship between VPD rate and drug concentration in plasma indicated no substantive difference between the two formulations. It was concluded that administration of Procanbid tablets every 12 hours is essentially equivalent to administration of procainamide extended-release tablets (Procan SR) every 6 hours with respect to pharmacokinetics of procainamide and NAPA and to VPD suppression.
The lupus anticoagulant, with or without other symptoms or signs of lupus, has been described in patients taking procainamide. Screening all such patients for the presence of these anticoagulants may be warranted (despite the rarity of episodes of bleeding) in view of the potentially increased risk of thrombotic events in patients who may already be predisposed. A prospective study to determine the incidence of lupus anticoagulant in procainamide-treated patients and the true frequency of thrombosis in these patients would be helpful in determining appropriate management.
