Therapeutic Reviews aim to provide essential independent information for health professionals about drugs used in palliative and hospice care. The content is also available on www.palliativedrugs.com and will feature in future editions of the Hospice and Palliative Care Formulary USA and its British and Canadian counterparts. The series editors welcome feedback on the articles (hq@palliativedrugs.com).
This year's Lasker Clinical Research Award goes to James Baird Glen for the discovery and development of the anesthetic propofol. Patients benefit from its fast onset and rapid systemic clearance, eliminating the prolonged sedation effects experienced with earlier agents. In just 30 years, propofol has been adopted around the world for safe and controlled induction of anesthesia.
Propofol is an intravenous short-acting anesthetic widely used to induce and maintain general anesthesia and to provide procedural sedation. The potential for propofol dependency and abuse has been recognized, and several cases of accidental overdose and suicide have emerged, mostly among the health professionals. Different studies have demonstrated an unpredictable interindividual variability of propofol pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics with forensic and clinical adverse relevant outcomes (e.g., pronounced respiratory and cardiac depression), namely, due to polymorphisms in the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase and cytochrome P450 isoforms and drugs administered concurrently. In this work the pharmacokinetics of propofol and fospropofol with particular focus on metabolic pathways is fully reviewed. It is concluded that knowing the metabolism of propofol may lead to the development of new clues to help further toxicological and clinical interpretations and to reduce serious adverse reactions such as respiratory failure, metabolic acidosis, rhabdomyolysis, cardiac bradyarrhythmias, hypotension and myocardial failure, anaphylaxis, hypertriglyceridemia, renal failure, hepatomegaly, hepatic steatosis, acute pancreatitis, abuse, and death. Particularly, further studies aiming to characterize polymorphic enzymes involved in the metabolic pathway, the development of additional routine forensic toxicological analysis, and the relatively new field of ''omics" technology, namely, metabolomics, can offer more in explaining the unpredictable interindividual variability.
OBJECTIVES: Most anesthetic drugs used for electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) have dose-dependent anticonvulsive effects, counter-acting seizure induction, lowering seizure quality. However, a consummate drug for ECT anesthesia has not yet been established. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to investigate the effects of etomidate, thiopental, propofol and co-administration of ketamine-propofol (ketofol) on seizure quality and hemodynamic safety. METHODS: Registries of 121 patients (1077 sessions) were retrospectively evaluated. The effects of anesthetics on ECT-related parameters (stimulation charge, central seizure duration, number of failed stimulation trials, mean arterial pressure, and peak heart rate) were analyzed via linear mixed-effects models. RESULTS: Overall, the seizure duration decreased, and the stimulation charge increased in time with continuing sessions within a course of ECT. The decrease in seizure duration and the increase in required stimulation charge was significantly lower with etomidate and ketofol. Additionally, ketofol was significantly related to a lower number of failed stimulation trials compared to propofol. Ketofol and propofol use was associated with a significantly lower postictal mean arterial pressure. CONCLUSION: Ketofol and etomidate were equivalently superior in the rate of decrease in seizure duration and the required elevation in stimulus charge, which would interpret into valuable clinical guidance, especially for "seizure resistant" patients, and their use may potentially lower ECT related cognitive side effects.
BACKGROUND: Information integration and network science are important theories for quantifying consciousness. However, whether these theories propose drug- or conscious state-related changes in EEG during anaesthesia-induced unresponsiveness remains unknown. METHODS: A total of 72 participants were randomised to receive i.v. infusion of propofol, dexmedetomidine, or ketamine at a constant infusion rate until loss of responsiveness. High-density EEG was recorded during the consciousness transition from the eye-closed baseline to the unresponsiveness state and then to the recovery of the responsiveness state. Permutation cross mutual information (PCMI) and PCMI-based brain networks in broadband (0.1-45 Hz) and sub-band frequencies were used to analyse drug- and state-related EEG signature changes. RESULTS: PCMI and brain networks exhibited state-related changes in certain brain regions and frequency bands. The within-area PCMI of the frontal, parietal, and occipital regions, and the between-area PCMI of the parietal-occipital region (median [inter-quartile ranges]), baseline vs unresponsive were as follows: 0.54 (0.46-0.58) vs 0.46 (0.40-0.50), 0.58 (0.52-0.60) vs 0.48 (0.44-0.53), 0.54 (0.49-0.59) vs 0.47 (0.42-0.52) decreased during anaesthesia for three drugs (P<0.05). Alpha PCMI in the frontal region, and gamma PCMI in the posterior area significantly decreased in the unresponsive state (P<0.05). The frontal, parietal, and occipital nodal clustering coefficients and parietal nodal efficiency decreased in the unresponsive state (P<0.05). The increased normalised path length in delta, theta, and gamma bands indicated impaired global integration (P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The three anaesthetics caused changes in information integration patterns and network functions. Thus, it is possible to build a quantifying framework for anaesthesia-induced conscious state changes on the EEG scale using PCMI and network science.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) models are used in target-controlled-infusion (TCI) systems to determine the optimal drug administration to achieve a desired target concentration in a central or effect-site compartment. Our aim was to develop a PK-PD model for propofol that can predict the bispectral index (BIS) for a broad population, suitable for TCI applications. METHODS: Propofol PK data were obtained from 30 previously published studies, five of which also contained BIS observations. A PK-PD model was developed using NONMEM. Weight, age, post-menstrual age (PMA), height, sex, BMI, and presence/absence of concomitant anaesthetic drugs were explored as covariates. The predictive performance was measured across young children, children, adults, elderly, and high-BMI individuals, and in simulated TCI applications. RESULTS: Overall, 15 433 propofol concentration and 28 639 BIS observations from 1033 individuals (672 males and 361 females) were analysed. The age range was from 27 weeks PMA to 88 yr, and the weight range was 0.68-160 kg. The final model uses age, PMA, weight, height, sex, and presence/absence of concomitant anaesthetic drugs as covariates. A 35-yr-old, 170 cm, 70 kg male (without concomitant anaesthetic drugs) has a V(1), V(2), V(3), CL, Q(2), Q(3), and k(e0) of 6.28, 25.5, 273 litres, 1.79, 1.75, 1.11 litres min(-1), and 0.146 min(-1), respectively. The propofol TCI administration using the model matches well with recommendations for all age groups considered for both anaesthesia and sedation. CONCLUSIONS: We developed a PK-PD model to predict the propofol concentrations and BIS for broad, diverse population. This should be useful for TCI in anaesthesia and sedation.
BACKGROUND/AIM: The influence of surgical interventions and anaesthesiological procedures on tumour progression was investigated as early as the 1920s. In current cancer management, the perioperative phase is increasingly being considered a vulnerable period with an increased risk of tumour cell dissemination due to medication, surgical manipulation, and immunosuppression. The extent to which narcotics administered in the perioperative setting influence the oncological outcomes of patients with pancreatic cancer is still unclear. MATERIALS AND METHODS: To investigate the effect of propofol and etomidate on the proliferation, cell-cycle distribution, apoptosis, and necrosis of pancreatic tumour cells in vitro, PaTu 8988t and Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells were treated with 0-1,000 muM propofol or etomidate for 24 h each. Cell proliferation was measured with enzyme-linked immunosorbent-bromodeoxyuridine assay. The apoptosis rate was analysed with annexin V staining and the cell-cycle distribution with flow cytometry. RESULTS: Propofol at 1,000 muM induced apoptosis and inhibited cell proliferation. The cell cycle showed an increased S-phase and reduced cells in the G(1)-phase. At 100 muM, propofol significantly inhibited proliferation of the pancreatic cancer cell line PaTu 8988t and reduced cells in the G(2)-phase in the cell cycle. Etomidate had no effects on cell-cycle distribution, proliferation, apoptosis, and necrosis at the concentrations used. CONCLUSION: In this study, propofol was shown to have anticancer effects by induction of apoptosis and inhibition of cell proliferation, while etomidate did not affect pancreatic cancer cells. However, it is too early to make any recommendation for changes in clinical practice and further clinical studies are warranted to investigate the effect of anaesthetics on cancer progression.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Propofol is widely used for hypnosis induction and maintenance of general anesthesia. Its effect can be assessed using the bispectral index (BIS). Many automatic infusion systems are based in pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) models to predict the response of the patient to the drug. However, all these models do not take into account intra and inter-patient variability. An adjusted intraoperative drug administration allows faster recovery and provides post-operative side-effect mitigation METHODS: BIS evolution and surgery-recorded propofol infusion data of a group of 60 adult patients (30 males/30 females) with ASA I/II physical status were used to test a real time PK/PD compartmental model. This new algorithm tunes three model parameters (ce50, gamma and ke0), minimizing a performance function online. RESULTS: The error in the BIS signal predicted by the real time PK/PD model was smaller than the error measured with fixed parameter equations. This model shows that ce50, gamma and ke0 change with time and patients, given a mean (95% confidence interval) of 3.89 (3.52-4.26)mg/l, 4.63 (4.13-5.13) and 0.36 (0.31-0.4)min(-1), respectively. CONCLUSIONS: The real time PK/PD model proposed provides a closer description of the patient real state at each sample time. This allows for greater control of the drug infusion, and thus the quantity of drug administered can be titrated to achieve the desired effect for the desired duration, and reduce unnecessary waste or post-operative effects.
Herein, we report a continuous flow process for the synthesis of 2,6-diisopropylphenol-also known as Propofol-a short-acting intravenous anesthesia, widely used in intensive care medicine to provide sedation and hypnosis. The synthesis is based on a two-step procedure: a double Friedel-Crafts alkylation followed by a decarboxylation step, both under continuous flow.
Seven patients received a series of low-dose propofol infusions designed to produce three successive pseudo-steady states of arterial blood concentration: 0.06, 0.17 and 0.43 micrograms ml-1. Arterial and arterialized venous blood samples were obtained simultaneously at the end of each infusion. The results indicate that 95% of the arterialized venous concentrations may be expected to lie within 1 +/- 43% of the corresponding arterial concentration, or -5 +/- 35% if one set of measurements with poor agreement between duplicate aliquots is omitted.
Propofol is an intravenous agent used commonly for the induction and maintenance of anesthesia, procedural, and critical care sedation in children. The mechanisms of action on the central nervous system involve interactions at various neurotransmitter receptors, especially the gamma-aminobutyric acid A receptor. Approved for use in the USA by the Food and Drug Administration in 1989, its use for induction of anesthesia in children less than 3 years of age still remains off-label. Despite its wide use in pediatric anesthesia, there is conflicting literature about its safety and serious adverse effects in particular subsets of children. Particularly as children are not "little adults", in this review, we emphasize the maturational aspects of propofol pharmacokinetics. Despite the myriad of propofol pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic studies and the ability to use allometrical scaling to smooth out differences due to size and age, there is no optimal model that can be used in target controlled infusion pumps for providing closed loop total intravenous anesthesia in children. As the commercial formulation of propofol is a nutrient-rich emulsion, the risk for bacterial contamination exists despite the Food and Drug Administration mandating addition of antimicrobial preservative, calling for manufacturers' directions to discard open vials after 6 h. While propofol has advantages over inhalation anesthesia such as less postoperative nausea and emergence delirium in children, pain on injection remains a problem even with newer formulations. Propofol is known to depress mitochondrial function by its action as an uncoupling agent in oxidative phosphorylation. This has implications for children with mitochondrial diseases and the occurrence of propofol-related infusion syndrome, a rare but seriously life-threatening complication of propofol. At the time of this review, there is no direct evidence in humans for propofol-induced neurotoxicity to the infant brain; however, current concerns of neuroapoptosis in developing brains induced by propofol persist and continue to be a focus of research.
Australian guidelines state "Following brief surgery or procedures with short acting anaesthetic drugs, the patient may be fit to drive after a normal night's sleep. After long surgery or procedures requiring longer lasting anaesthesia, it may not be safe to drive for 24 hours or more". The increasing use of the short-acting anaesthetic drug propofol as a solitary sedative medication for simple endoscopy procedures suggests a need to review this blanket policy. Thirty patients presenting for elective day surgery were recruited as volunteers for a pre-procedure driving simulation study and randomised to propofol or placebo arms. Driving ability was assessed at baseline and then, in the propofol group, at three effect-site concentrations. Driving impairment at these concentrations of propofol was compared to that of a third group of volunteers with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.05% (g/100 ml). Driving impairment at 0.2 microg/ml propofol effect-site concentration was not statistically different to placebo. Impairment increased with propofol effect-site concentration (P=0.002) and at 0.4 microg/ml it was similar to that found with a blood alcohol concentration of 50 mg/100 ml (0.05%). Plasma propofol concentrations of 0.2 microg/ml, as might be found approximately an hour after short (<1 hour duration) propofol-only sedation for endoscopy, were not associated with driving impairment in our young cohort of volunteers.
This study aimed to investigate ADRB2 gene expression and further understand the effects of dexmedetomidine on cardiac output and oxygen metabolism in tissues and organs by comparing the changes in hemodynamics after the patient has been sedated with dexmedetomidine and propofol after abdominal surgery. A total of 84 patients were randomly divided into the Dexmedetomidine Group (DEX Group with 40 cases) and Propofol Group (PRO Group with 44 cases). For the DEX Group, dexmedetomidine was used for sedation (loading dose: 1 ug/kg, infused for 10min; maintenance dose: 0.3ug/kg/h ~); for the PRO Group, propofol was used for sedation (loading dose: 0.5mg/kg, infused for 10min; maintenance dose: 0.5mg/kg/h ~), and the dosage of sedation drug was according to the sedation target (BIS value 60-80). Before the sedation and 5min, 10min, 30min, 1h, 2h, 4h and 6h after the loading dose, the Mindray and Vigileo monitors were used to record the BIS values and hemodynamics indices of the patients in both groups. Both DEX and PRO groups could reach the target BIS value (P> 0.05). The CI decreases before and after the administration in both groups were significant (P <0.01). The SV level of DEX group after administration was higher than before administration, while the SV level of the PRO Group after administration was lower than before administration (P <0.01). The lactate clearance rate (6h) of DEX Group was higher than that of PRO Group (P <0.05). The incidence of postoperative delirium in the Dexmedetomidine Group was lower than in the Propofol Group (P <0.05). Compared with propofol, dexmedetomidine for sedation can reduce the heart rate and increase the cardiac stroke output. Cell analysis of the ADRB2 gene showed that this gene is more expressed in the cytosol. Also, its expression in the respiratory system is more than in other organs. Considering that this gene plays a role in stimulating the sympathetic nervous system and the cardiovascular system, it can be used in the safety regulation of clinical prognosis and treatment resistance along with Dexmedetomidine and Propofol.
BACKGROUND: Propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol) is a water-insoluble, intravenous anesthetic that is widely used for the induction and maintenance of anesthesia as well as for endoscopic and pediatric sedation. After admission, propofol undergoes extensive hepatic and extrahepatic metabolism, including direct conjugation to propofol glucuronide and hydroxylation to 2,6-diisopropyl-1,4-quinol. The latter substance subsequently undergoes phase II metabolism, resulting in the formation of further metabolites (1quinolglucuronide, 4quinolglucuronide and 4quinol-sulfate). Further minor phase I propofol metabolites (2-(omega-propanol)-6-isopropylphenol and 2-(omega-propanol)-6-isopropyl-1,4-quinol)) are also described. Due to its chemical structure with the phenolic hydroxyl group, propofol is also an appropriate substrate for sulfation by sulfotransferases. METHODS: The existence of propofol sulfate was investigated by liquid chromatography electrospray ionization triple quadrupole mass spectrometry (LCESIQQQ-MS) and liquid chromatography electrospray ionization quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (LCESI-QTOF-MS). A propofol sulfate reference standard was used for identification and method development, yielding a precursor at m/z 257 (deprotonated propofol sulfate) and product ions at m/z 177 (deprotonated propofol) and m/z 80 ([SO3]-). RESULTS: Propofol sulfate - a further phase II metabolite of propofol - was verified in urine samples by LC-ESI-QQQ-MS and LC-ESI-QTOF-MS. Analyses of urine samples from five volunteers collected before and after propofol-induced sedation verified the presence of propofol sulfate in urine following propofol administration, whereas ascertained concentrations of this metabolite were significantly lower compared with detected propofol glucuronide concentrations. CONCLUSIONS: The existence of propofol sulfate as a further phase II propofol metabolite in humans could be verified by two different detection techniques (LCESIQQQ-MS and LC-ESI-QTOFMS) on the basis of a propofol sulfate reference standard. Evaluation of the quantitative analyses of propofol sulfate imply that propofol sulfate represents a minor metabolite of propofol and is only slightly involved in human propofol clearance.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of remimazolam besylate and propofol for deep sedation in critically ill patients. METHODS: In this single-center, prospective, randomized, controlled pilot study, patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) requiring deep sedation were randomized to receive remimazolam besylate or propofol intravenously. Deep sedation was defined as a Richmond Agitation and Sedation Scale (RASS) score of - 4 or - 5. Sedation depth was monitored using RASS and Narcotrend Index (NI). The primary outcome was the percentage of time within the target sedation range without rescue sedation. The secondary outcomes included ventilator-free hours within 7 days, successful extubation, length of ICU stay, and 28-day mortality. Adverse events during the interventional period were also recorded. RESULTS: Thirty patients were assigned to each group. The median (IQR) RASS score was - 5.0 (- 5.0, - 4.0), and the median (IQR) NI value was 29.0 (21.0, 37.0) during the intervention period. Target RASS was reached a median of 100% of the sedation time in the two groups. No significant differences were observed in ventilator-free hours within 7 days, successful extubation, length of ICU stay, or 28-day mortality among groups. Hypotension occurred in 16 (53.3%) patients of remimazolam group and 18 (60.0%) patients of propofol group (p > 0.05). No patient experienced bradycardia. CONCLUSIONS: Remimazolam besylate appears to be an effective and safe agent for short-term deep sedation in critically ill patients. Our findings warrant large sample-sized randomized clinical trials.
Ciprofol, a novel gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor agonist, outperforms propofol with minimal cardiovascular effects, higher potency, reduced injection pain, and a broader safety margin. Despite these advantages, ciprofol's clinical research is still emerging. This study compares the median effective dose (ED(50)) and adverse reactions of ciprofol and propofol, in conjunction with sufentanil, for suppressing cardiovascular responses during tracheal intubation. Fifty-three adult patients scheduled for tracheal intubation under general anesthesia were enrolled and randomly assigned to receive either ciprofol (Group C) or propofol (Group P), according to a random number table. Tracheal intubation was performed using a standardized laryngoscope and endotracheal tube. The Dixon's up-and-down method was employed to determine the ED(50) and 95% effective dose (ED(95)) of ciprofol and propofol in inhibiting cardiovascular responses during tracheal intubation. Based on the pilot study, the initial dose for ciprofol was set at 0.35 mg/kg (with a 0.01 mg/kg increment) and for propofol at 2.0 mg/kg (with a 0.1 mg/kg increment). Probit analysis was applied to derive dose-response curves, while adverse reactions were continuously monitored. A total of 54 participants were included, with 24 in group C (1 excluded) and 30 in group P. Probit analysis revealed that the ED(50) of ciprofol for inhibiting cardiovascular responses to tracheal intubation were 0.326 mg/kg (95% CI 0.304-0.337 mg/kg), and for propofol, 1.541 mg/kg (95% CI 1.481-1.599 mg/kg). The heart rate in group P was significantly higher than the group C at 1 minute (p = 0.026) and 3 minutes (p = 0.016) post-intubation. Systolic and diastolic blood pressures (SBP and DBP) decreased significantly before and after intubation compared to baseline values in both groups (p< 0.05). Group C experienced significantly less injection pain (p = 0.001), although the incidence of other adverse effects was not statistically different between groups (p > 0.05).Clinical Trial Registration: hppts://ClinicalTrials.gov; Identifier: NCT06095570(18/10/2023).
