Pyrazinamide (PZA) is an important component of a standard combination therapy against tuberculosis. However, PZA is hepatotoxic, and the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Biotransformation of PZA in the liver was primarily suggested behind its hepatoxicity. This review summarizes the knowledge of the key enzymes involved in PZA metabolism and discusses their contributions to PZA hepatotoxicity. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This review outlines the current understanding of PZA metabolism and hepatotoxicity. This work also highlights the gaps in this field, which can be used to guide the future studies on PZA-induced liver injury.
False-susceptible phenotypic drug-susceptibility testing (DST) results for pyrazinamide due to mutations with MICs close to the critical concentration (CC) confound the classification of pncA resistance mutations, leading to an underestimate of the specificity of genotypic DST. This could be minimized by basing treatment decisions on well-understood mutations and by adopting an area of technical uncertainty for phenotypic DST rather than only testing the CC, as is current practice for the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex.
SETTING: Department of Chest Diseases, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine and Ataturk Chest Diseases Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. OBJECTIVE: The primary purpose of this study was to assess the contributory role of viral hepatitis in antituberculosis drug hepatotoxicity. DESIGN: Serologic markers for viral hepatitis were studied in 57 patients who developed acute hepatitis during antituberculosis therapy with rifampicin and isoniazid. RESULTS: Among 705 adult tuberculous patients, 57 (8.1%) developed acute hepatitis during therapy with rifampicin and isoniazid. Serologic markers confirmed the presence of hepatitis B in 6 (10.5%) and hepatitis C in 4 (7%) of the 57 patients. Acute hepatitis A was not diagnosed in any of the patients. CONCLUSION: Hepatitis occurring during antituberculosis therapy may not be drug-induced in all patients. Apart from the other factors mentioned above the endemicity of viral hepatitis in developing countries could be responsible for the higher incidence of antituberculosis-drug hepatitis.
Pyrazinamide (PZA) is a unique frontline drug for shortening tuberculosis (TB) treatment, but its mechanisms of action are elusive. We previously found one PZA-resistant strain that harbors an alanine deletion at position 438 (Delta438A) in RpsA, a target of PZA associated with PZA resistance, but its role in causing PZA resistance has been inconclusive. Here, we introduced the RpsA Delta438A mutation along with the D123A mutation into the Mycobacterium tuberculosis chromosome and demonstrated that these RspA mutations are indeed responsible for PZA resistance.
BACKGROUND: Pyrazinamide (PZA) and fluoroquinolone (FQ), particularly moxifloxacin (MXF), are essential drugs in the World Health Organization (WHO) recommended short-course regimen to treat drug-susceptible tuberculosis (TB). METHODS: To understand the extent of PZA and MXF susceptibility in general TB cases in Taiwan, we conducted retrospective analyses of 385 conservative Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) isolates identified from 4 TB laboratories in different regions of Taiwan. The case information was obtained from the TB registry. Genotypic drug susceptibility testing (DST) was performed by sequencing drug-resistance associated genes, PZA (pncA) and FQ (gyrA, and gyrB). Phenotypic DST was determined using the Bactec MGIT 960 system or the agar proportion method. Genotyping was carried out using spacer oligonucleotide typing. RESULTS: In this study, 4.7% (18/385) cases' isolates harbored pncA mutations and 7.0% (27/385) cases' isolates harbored gyrA or gyrB mutation. Notably, pncA mutation was associated with Beijing family genotypes (P = 0.028), East African-Indian (EAI) genotypes (P = 0.047) and MDR-TB (P < 0.001). Whereas, gyrA or gyrB mutation was associated with EAI genotypes (P = 0.020) and MDR-TB (P = 0.006). In addition, a statistically significant difference was found between the favorable outcomes using active and inactive PZA (P = 0.009) in 38 case isolates with any pncA, gyrA, or gyrB mutation. CONCLUSION: We concluded that routine PZA and FQ susceptibility tests are recommended for guiding the treatment of TB.
The antitubercular drugs are associated with different cutaneous adverse drug reactions. Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a severe form of cutaneous reaction. Although it is rare, it carries a high mortality rate. We report a case of a 75-year-old man with abdominal tuberculosis, who developed pyrazinamide-induced TEN.
Pyrazinamide (PZA) is an essential sterilizing drug and with rifampicin enables six-month short-course antituberculosis chemotherapy. Despite routine use for nearly forty years uncertainty remains regarding the most appropriate PZA dosage for children. In view of this uncertainty literature relating to the efficacy and pharmacokinetics of PZA in children treated for tuberculosis and in adult volunteers and patients was reviewed. Making use of the PZA maximum concentration (C(max)) following various PZA dosages in different groups straight line regression of concentration on dosage was fitted through the origin by least squares and weighted for the numbers of subjects. The fitted line offers an approximation of the likely PZA C(max) that would result from a particular dosage. The slopes of C(max)/dosage of the fitted lines are 1.32 (SE 0.099) for paediatric patients, 1.36 (SE 0.051) for adult volunteers and 1.35 (SE 0.037) for adult patients; there is little difference between the C(max) concentrations achieved in children and adults, whether patients or healthy volunteers, following various mg/kg body weight dosages, suggesting that children and adults receiving the same mg/kg body weight PZA dosage will reach a similar C(max). Children can receive the same mg/kg body weight PZA dosage as adults.
The current study aims to understand the resistance of Bifidobacterium adolescentis to different anti-tubercular drugs (first-line oral tuberculosis drugs). The bacteria were grown with anti-tubercular drugs such as isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and streptomycin to better understand the resistance phenomena. It was found that even at tenfold higher concentrations, growth rates remained unchanged. In addition, a small number of bacteria were found to aggregate strongly, a property that protects against the toxicity of the drug. Further FE-SEM (Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy) analysis revealed that some bacteria became excessively long, elongated, and protruded on the surface. Size scattering analysis confirmed the presence of bifidobacteria in the size range of 1.0-100 mum. After whole genome sequence analysis, certain mutations were found in the relevant gene. In vitro, foam formation and growth in the presence of H(2)O(2) and HPLC (High Performance Liquid Chromatography) studies provide additional evidence for the presence of catalase. According to RAST (Rapid Annotation Using Subsystems Technology) annotation and CARD (Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database analysis), there were not many components in the genome that were resistant to antibiotics. Whole genome sequence (WGS) analysis does not show the presence of bacteriocins and antibiotic resistance genes, but few hypothetical proteins were observed. 3D structure and docking studies suggest their interaction with specific ligands.
A critical barrier to codevelopment of tuberculosis (TB) regimens is a limited ability to identify optimal drug and dose combinations in early-phase clinical testing. While pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PKPD) target attainment is the primary tool for exposure-response optimization of TB drugs, the PD target is a static index that does not distinguish individual drug contributions to the efficacy of a multidrug combination. A PKPD model of bedaquiline-pretomanid-pyrazinamide (BPaZ) for the treatment of pulmonary TB was developed as part of a dynamic exposure-response approach to regimen development. The model describes a time course relationship between the drug concentrations in plasma and their individual as well as their combined effect on sputum bacillary load assessed by solid culture CFU counts and liquid culture time to positivity (TTP). The model parameters were estimated using data from the phase 2A studies NC-001-(J-M-Pa-Z) and NC-003-(C-J-Pa-Z). The results included a characterization of BPaZ activity as the most and least sensitive to changes in pyrazinamide and bedaquiline exposures, respectively, with antagonistic activity of BPa compensated by synergistic activity of BZ and PaZ. Simulations of the NC-003 study population with once-daily bedaquiline at 200 mg, pretomanid at 200 mg, and pyrazinamide at 1,500 mg showed BPaZ would require 3 months to attain liquid culture negativity in 90% of participants. These results for BPaZ were intended to be an example application with the general approach aimed at entirely novel drug combinations from a growing pipeline of new and repurposed TB drugs.
We investigated the prevalence, trends, and risk factors for pyrazinamide (PZA) and moxifloxacin (MOX) resistance among tuberculosis (TB) cases in China and also analyzed the population structure of Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains. All the M. tuberculosis strains enrolled in this study were collected from the national TB prevalence surveys. Each strain was genotyped by analyzing the regions of RD105 and IS6110 in the NTF region. The Bactec MGIT 960 system was used to detect the drug susceptibility of M. tuberculosis isolates to PZA and MOX. Based on the genotyping results, 241 (66.4%) strains were classified as Beijing genotype in 2000, which was significantly lower than in 2010 (76.2%, P < 0.01). The proportion of the modern Beijing genotype increased significantly from 49.6% in 2000 to 68.1% in 2010 (P < 0.01), while no significant difference was observed in the rate of ancient Beijing genotype between 2000 and 2010 (P = 0.676). In addition, we found that the proportion of PZA resistance in 2010 (15.0%) was significantly higher than that in 2000 (9.6%, P = 0.04). For MOX, there were more MOX-resistant isolates detected in 2010 (7.7%) than in 2000 (3.0%). In conclusion, our data demonstrate that the Beijing genotype was the predominant M. tuberculosis lineage during the past decade. The proportion of Beijing genotype isolates significantly increased from 2000 to 2010, largely due to an increase in the modern Beijing sublineage. In addition, resistance to PZA and MOX increased significantly in China between 2000 and 2010.
Pyrazinamide and isoniazid, as two first-line anti-tuberculosis drugs, are investigated by terahertz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS). Both pyrazinamide and isoniazid have three absorption peaks, at 0.50, 0.71, 1.42 THz and 1.16, 1.46, 1.56 THz, respectively, which can be used as the basis for qualitative identification of these two drugs. In order to gain insight into the origin of the characteristic absorption peaks, density functional theory (DFT) based on single molecular, dimer, and crystalline structures of pyrazinamide and isoniazid are performed. The purpose of the calculation based on the single molecular structure is to understand the intramolecular interaction, while those based on the dimer and crystalline structures are to investigate the intermolecular interactions in PNZ and INZ. Comparing the theoretical results of the dimer and crystalline based structures reveals that the crystalline structure leads to vibrational spectra that are closer to the experimental values in terms of the number of absorption peaks and the positions of the absorption peaks. Vibrational mode assignments can be summarized as that the characteristic absorption peaks of pyrazinamide mainly come from intermolecular interaction, and the characteristic absorption peaks of isoniazid originate from both the intramolecular and intermolecular interactions. Our experimental and theoretical results indicate that the combination of THz-TDS with DFT is an effective approach for identification of molecules with pharmaceutical significance.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the pharmacokinetics and safety/tolerability of isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide in children and adolescents with tuberculous meningitis (TBM). DESIGN: Prospective observational pharmacokinetic study with an exploratory pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic analysis. SETTING: Hasan Sadikin Hospital, Bandung, Indonesia. PATIENTS: Individuals aged 0-18 years clinically diagnosed with TBM and receiving first-line anti-tuberculosis drug dosages according to revised WHO-recommended treatment guidelines. INTERVENTIONS: Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide were assessed on days 2 and 10 of treatment. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Plasma exposures during the daily dosing interval (AUC(0-24)), peak plasma concentrations (C(max)) and CSF concentrations. RESULTS: Among 20 eligible patients, geometric mean AUC(0-24) of isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide was 18.5, 66.9 and 315.5 hour∙mg/L on day 2; and 14.5, 71.8 and 328.4 hour∙mg/L on day 10, respectively. Large interindividual variabilities were observed in AUC(0-24) and C(max) of all drugs. All patients had suboptimal rifampicin AUC(0-24) for TBM treatment indication and very low rifampicin CSF concentrations. Four patients developed grade 2-3 drug-induced liver injury (DILI) within the first 4 weeks of treatment, in whom anti-tuberculosis drugs were temporarily stopped, and no DILI recurred after reintroduction of rifampicin and isoniazid. AUC(0-24) of isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide along with C(max) of isoniazid and pyrazinamide on day 10 were higher in patients who developed DILI than those without DILI (p<0.05). CONCLUSION: Higher rifampicin doses are strongly warranted in treatment of children and adolescents with TBM. The association between higher plasma concentrations of isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide and the development of DILI needs confirmatory studies.
