Eighteen patients with Plasmodium falciparum infection were studied in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, to monitor the response of the malaria parasite to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. In all infections the parasitaemia was cleared rapidly following treatment with standard dose of the drug combination; no recrudescence was observed during follow-up periods of 1 week (4 patients) and 4 weeks (14 patients). Parallel in vitro tests indicated that 5 of the 16 isolates successfully tested were resistant to pyrimethamine alone.
Fifty-eight Nigerian children with Plasmodium falciparum malaria were allocated randomly into two groups and treated with either chloroquine (25 mg/kg over three days) or Fansidar (35 mg sulphadoxin (+ 1/20 pyrimethamine) per kg single dose)). They were observed for 28 days during which blood films were examined periodically for malaria parasites. Asexual forms of P. falciparum, which were present in the blood films of all the patients in both groups before commencing treatment, disappeared rapidly from the blood so that by the fourth day after starting treatment no parasites were seen in the blood films. The blood films thereafter remained negative in both groups throughout the rest of the 28-day observation period. The rate of fever clearance was also similar in both groups. The study did not show resistance to Fansidar or to chloroquine. There is therefore, at present, no case for the indiscriminate use of Fansidar on the basis of suspected chloroquine resistance.
BACKGROUND: Mutations in the Plasmodium falciparum dhfr gene confer resistance to pyrimethamine, which is widely used for malaria chemoprevention in Africa. We aimed to evaluate the frequency and evolution of dhfr mutations in Plasmodium ovale spp in Africa and their functional consequences, which are incompletely characterised. METHODS: We analysed dhfr mutations and their frequencies in P ovale spp isolates collected between Feb 1, 2004, and Aug 31, 2023, from the French National Malaria Reference Centre collection and from field studies in Benin, Gabon, and Kenya. Genetic patterns of positive selection were investigated. Full-length recombinant wild-type and mutant DHFR enzymes from both P ovale curtisi and P ovale wallikeri were expressed in bacteria to test whether the most common mutations reduced pyrimethamine susceptibility. FINDINGS: We included 518 P ovale spp samples (314 P ovale curtisi and 204 P ovale wallikeri). In P ovale curtisi, Ala15Ser-Ser58Arg was the most common dhfr mutation (39%; 124 of 314 samples). In P ovale wallikeri, dhfr mutations were less frequent, with Phe57Leu-Ser58Arg reaching 17% (34 of 204 samples). These two mutants were the most prevalent in central and east Africa and were fixed in Kenyan isolates. We detected six and four other non-synonymous mutations, representing 8% (24 isolates) and 2% (five isolates) of the P ovale curtisi and P ovale wallikeri isolates, respectively. Whole-genome sequencing and microsatellite analyses revealed reduced genetic diversity around the mutant pocdhfr and powdhfr genes. The mutant DHFR proteins showed structural changes at the pyrimethamine binding site in-silico, confirmed by a 4-times increase in pyrimethamine half-maximal inhibitory concentration in an Escherichia coli growth assay for the Phe57Leu-Ser58Arg mutant and 50-times increase for the Ala15Ser-Ser58Arg mutant, compared with the wild-type counterparts. INTERPRETATION: The widespread use of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine for malaria chemoprevention might have exerted fortuitous selection pressure for dhfr mutations in P ovale spp. This calls for closer monitoring of dhfr and dhps mutations in P ovale spp. FUNDING: French Ministry of Health, Agence Nationale de la Recherche, and Global Emerging Infections Surveillance branch of the Armed Forces Health Surveillance Division.
Little is known about the existence of drug-resistant Toxoplasma gondii strains and their possible impact on clinic outcomes. To expand our knowledge about the existence of natural variations on drug susceptibility of T. gondii strains in Brazil, we evaluated the in vitro and in vivo susceptibility to sulfadiazine (SDZ) and pyrimethamine (PYR) of three atypical strains (Wild2, Wild3, and Wild4) isolated from free-living wild birds. In vitro susceptibility assay showed that the three strains were equally susceptible to SDZ and PYR but variations in the susceptibility were observed to SDZ plus PYR treatment. Variations in the proliferation rates in vitro and spontaneous conversion to bradyzoites were also accessed for all strains. Wild2 showed a lower cystogenesis capacity compared to Wild3 and Wild4. The in vivo analysis showed that while Wild3 was highly susceptible to all SDZ and PYR doses, and their combination, Wild2 and Wild4 showed low susceptibility to the lower doses of SDZ or PYR. Interestingly, Wild2 presented low susceptibility to the higher doses of SDZ, PYR and their combination. Our results suggest that the variability in treatment response by T. gondii isolates could possibly be related not only to drug resistance but also to the strain cystogenesis capacity.
Sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine is recommended for intermittent preventative treatment of malaria during pregnancy. Data from 98 women during pregnancy and 77 after delivery in four African countries were analyzed using nonlinear mixed-effects modeling to characterize the effects of pregnancy, postpartum duration, and other covariates such as body weight and hematocrit on sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine pharmacokinetic properties. During pregnancy, clearance increased 3-fold for sulfadoxine but decreased by 18% for pyrimethamine. Postpartum sulfadoxine clearance decreased gradually over 13 weeks. This finding, together with hematocrit-based scaling of plasma to whole-blood concentrations and allometric scaling of pharmacokinetics parameters with body weight, enabled site-specific differences in the pharmacokinetic profiles to be reduced significantly but not eliminated. Further research is necessary to explain residual site-specific differences and elucidate whether dose-optimization, to address the 3-fold increase in clearance of sulfadoxine in pregnant women, is necessary, viable, and safe with the current fixed dose combination of sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine.
Pyrimethamine (PYR) is used to treat parasitic infections including toxoplasmosis, pneumonia and cystoisosporiasis in HIV patients. Various oral medicines have shown phototoxicity therefore, we aimed to study the phototoxicity of PYR and its molecular mechanism involving stress responsive lysosomal protein Lamp2 and mitochondrial mediated signaling pathway under normal UVA/B exposure. We found that photodegradation and subsequent photoproduct formation was evident through LCMS/MS analysis. Photosensitized PYR produces ROS that cause damage to DNA, cell membrane and membrane bound organelles in human keratinocytes. PYR triggered cytotoxicity and phototoxicity that was evident through MTT and NRU assay respectively. Intracellular ROS generation caused phosphatidyl serine (PS) translocation in cell membrane, lysosome membrane permeabilization (LMP) and mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) collapse that was further validated through caspase3 activation. DNA damage was measured as tail DNA formation and cell cycle arrest in G1 phase. Photosensitized PYR induces oxidative stress in the form of overexpression of Lamp2 that ultimately led to cellular apoptosis. Moreover, the effects of UVB were higher than UVA, probably due to its direct interaction with various macromolecules. We propose that photoexcited PYR may be harmful to human health even at normal sunlight exposure. Therefore, protective procedures should be practiced during PYR medication.
Fas is a protein that plays a major role in the apoptotic mechanism of several cell types, including white blood cells (WBC). Mutations of the Fas gene in humans are known to lead to autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS). Glucocorticoids or cytostatic drugs are sometimes used to treat the lymphoproliferation in these patients. When treated with the anti-malaria drug Fansidar, a patient with ALPS showed a marked shrinkage of the lymph node masses, decrease in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) and an increase in neutrophil numbers. In addition, an increased Fas expression was seen on all types of leucocytes.
Haiti is striving for zero local malaria transmission by the year 2025. Chloroquine remains the first-line treatment, and sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine (SP) has been used for mass drug-administration pilot programs. In March 2016, nationwide molecular surveillance was initiated to assess molecular resistance signatures for chloroquine and SP. For 778 samples collected through December 2017, we used Sanger sequencing to investigate putative resistance markers to chloroquine (Pfcrt codons 72, 74, 75, and 76), sulfadoxine (Pfdhps codons 436, 437, 540, 581, 613), and pyrimethamine (Pfdhfr codons 50, 51, 59, 108, 164). No parasites harbored Pfcrt point mutations. Prevalence of the Pfdhfr S108N single mutation was 47%, and we found the triple mutant Pfdhfr haplotype (108N, 51I, and 59R) in a single isolate. We observed no Pfdhps variants except in 1 isolate (A437G mutation). These data confirm the lack of highly resistant chloroquine and SP alleles in Haiti and support the continued use of chloroquine and SP.
Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase (PfDHFR-TS) is an important target enzyme in malarial chemotherapy. An understanding of how novel inhibitors interact with wild-type (wtPfDHFR), quadruple-mutant (qmPfDHFR), and human (hDHFR) enzymes is required for the development of these compounds as antimalarials. This study is focused on a series of des-Cl and m-Cl phenyl analogs of pyrimethamine with various flexible 6-substituents. The interactions of these compounds with DHFR enzymes were investigated by 3 D-QSAR, MD simulations, MM-PBSA, and DFT calculations. CoMFA and CoMSIA models were developed with good predictive abilities for wtPfDHFR and qmPfDHFR. For hDHFR, CoMSIA models combined with clogP descriptor were successfully derived. Binding free energy using MM-PBSA and comparison of per residue decomposition energy analyses with the DFT method at M06-2X/6-31G ++(d,p) level of theory indicated that Asp54 and Phe58 play important roles in the binding of the most potent compound in the series (compound 27) with both wtPfDHFR and qmPfDHFR, whereas Arg59 and Arg122 were additionally found to interact with this inhibitor in qmPfDHFR. For hDHFR, the residues Glu30 and Phe34 but not Arg70, equivalent to Asp54, Phe58, and Arg122 in PfDHFR, also play role in compound 27 binding through strong hydrophobic interactions (Phe34) and hydrogen bond network with Glu30, Ile7, and Val115. From the key interactions identified in the DHFR-inhibitor complexes, a general scheme is proposed for designing new inhibitors selective for PfDHFR that is important for the development of novel antifolate antimalarials.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.
A simple, accurate and precise RP-HPLC method was developed for the simultaneous determination of chloroquine, pyrimethamine and cetirizine hydrochloride concentrations in bulk drug and human serum. The assay was performed using a mobile phase of methanol: water (70:30) at pH of 2.8 +/- 0.05 on the Purospher C-18 column with UV detection at 230 nm and rosuvastatin used as an internal standard. The retention times observed for chloroquine, pyrimethamine and cetirizine hydrochloride were 3.5, 2.5 and 5.5 minutes, respectively. The method was found to be specific for the assayed drugs showing a linear response in the concentration range of 1-100 mug mL-1 with coefficients of determination values of (r = 0.999). The method was developed and validated according to ICH guidelines. The method was used to monitor the serum samples and was found to be sensitive for therapeutic purposes, showing the potential to be a useful tool for routine analysis in laboratories.
BACKGROUND: Resistance to anti-malarial drugs is associated with polymorphisms in target genes and surveillance for these molecular markers is important to detect the emergence of mutations associated with drug resistance and signal recovering sensitivity to anti-malarials previously used. METHODS: The presence of polymorphisms in genes associated with Plasmodium falciparum resistance to chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine was evaluated by Sanger sequencing, in 85 P. falciparum day of enrollment samples from a therapeutic efficacy study of artemether-lumefantrine conducted in 2018-2019 in Quibdo, Colombia. Samples were genotyped to assess mutations in pfcrt (codons 72-76), pfdhfr (codons 51, 59, 108, and 164), and pfdhps genes (codons 436, 437, 540, and 581). Further, the genetic diversity of infections using seven neutral microsatellites (NMSs) (C2M34, C3M69, Poly alpha, TA1, TA109, 2490, and PfPK2) was assessed. RESULTS: All isolates carried mutant alleles for pfcrt (K76T and N75E), and for pfdhfr (N51I and S108N), while for pfdhps, mutations were observed only for codon A437G (32/73, 43.8%). Fifty samples (58.8%) showed a complete neutral microsatellites (NMS) profile. The low mean number of alleles (2 +/- 0.57) per locus and mean expected heterozygosity (0.17 +/- 0.03) showed a reduced genetic diversity. NMS multilocus genotypes (MMG) were built and nine MMG were identified. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these findings confirm the fixation of chloroquine and pyrimethamine-resistant alleles already described in the literature, implying that these drugs are not currently appropriate for use in Colombia. In contrast, mutations in the pfdhps gene were only observed at codon 437, an indication that full resistance to sulfadoxine has not been achieved in Choco. MMGs found matched the clonal lineage E variant 1 previously reported in northwestern Colombia.
