[Figure: see text].
BACKGROUND: Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIPO) may be a primary or secondary phenomenon and is often multifactorial. Treatment is largely directed at improving colonic motility. The use of cholinesterase inhibitors such as pyridostigmine has been hypothesized to increase acetylcholine in the bowel, improving symptoms and transit times. METHODS: A systematic review of the use of pyridostigmine in CIPO was conducted using scientific and commercial search engines identifying scientific studies enrolling adult human subjects, published from 2000 to 2022 in the English language. RESULTS: Four studies were identified including two randomized controlled trials (RCT) and two observational studies. The studies had heterogenous inclusion criteria, dosing regimens and reported outcomes. Two studies were identified as being at high risk of bias. All studies reported improved patient outcomes with use of pyridostigmine, and low rates (4.3%) of mild cholinergic side effects. No major side effects were reported. CONCLUSION: The use of pyridostigmine in management of CIPO is biologically plausible due to its ability to increase colonic motility, and early studies on its role are uniformly suggestive of benefit with low side-effect profile. Four clinical studies have been conducted to date, with small sample sizes, heterogeneity and high risk of bias. Further high-quality studies are required to enable assessment of pyridostigmine's utility as an effective management strategy in CIPO.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the long-term (for up to 3 months) efficacy and safety of single or combined therapy with midodrine and pyridostigmine for neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (OH). METHODS: This was a randomized, open-label clinical trial. In total, 87 patients with symptomatic neurogenic OH were enrolled and randomized to receive 1 of 3 treatments: midodrine only, pyridostigmine only, or midodrine + pyridostigmine. The patients were followed up at 1 and 3 months after treatment. The primary outcome measures were improvement in orthostatic blood pressure (BP) drop at 3 months. Secondary endpoints were improvement of the orthostatic BP drop at 1 month and amelioration of the questionnaire score evaluating OH-associated symptoms. RESULTS: Orthostatic systolic and diastolic BP drops improved significantly at 3 months after treatment in all treatment groups. Orthostatic symptoms were significantly ameliorated during the 3-month treatment, and the symptom severity was as follows: midodrine only < midodrine + pyridostigmine < pyridostigmine only group. Mild to moderate adverse events were reported by 11.5% of the patients. CONCLUSIONS: Single or combination treatment with midodrine and pyridostigmine was effective and safe in patients with OH for up to 3 months. Midodrine was better than pyridostigmine at improving OH-related symptoms. CLINICALTRIALSGOV IDENTIFIER: NCT02308124. CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class IV evidence that for patients with neurogenic OH, long-term treatment with midodrine alone, pyridostigmine alone, or both midodrine and pyridostigmine is safe and has similar effects in improving orthostatic BP drop up to 3 months.
Acquired myasthenia gravis (MG) is a chronic autoimmune disorder of the neuromuscular junction, characterized clinically by muscle weakness and abnormal fatigability on exertion. Current guidelines and recommendations for MG treatment are based largely on clinical experience, retrospective analyses and expert consensus. Available therapies include oral acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors for symptomatic treatment, and short- and long-term disease-modifying treatments. This review focuses on treatment of MG, mainly on the use of the AChE inhibitor pyridostigmine. Despite a lack of data from well controlled clinical trials to support their use, AChE inhibitors, of which pyridostigmine is the most commonly used, are recommended as first-line therapy for MG. Pyridostigmine has been used as a treatment for MG for over 50 years and is generally considered safe. It is suitable as a long-term treatment in patients with generalized non-progressive milder disease, and as an adjunctive therapy in patients with severe disease who are also receiving immunotherapy. Novel AChE inhibitors with oral antisense oligonucleotides have been developed and preliminary results appear to be promising. In general, however, AChE inhibitors provide only partial benefit and most patients eventually switch to long-term immunosuppressive therapies, most frequently corticosteroids and/or azathioprine. Although AChE inhibitors are known to be well tolerated and effective in relieving the symptoms of MG, further efforts are required to improve treatment options for the management of this disorder.
PURPOSE: This study aimed to evaluate the effect of Pyridostigmine on IGF-1 and GH levels and the outcomes of COS cycles in women with POR. METHODS: A total of 110 eligible women were randomly allocated to Pyridostigmine (n: 55) and control (n: 55) groups. COS outcomes, including gonadotrophin doses, COS duration, cycle cancellation rate, number of retrieved oocytes, number of MII oocytes, and fertilization rate, were compared between the groups. Also, IGF-1 and GH levels were measured at three time points: baseline, on the 5th day of the cycle, and on the trigger day. RESULTS: A total of 92 participants (Pyridostigmine: 44, Control: 48) were included in the final analysis. The Pyridostigmine group required significantly lower gonadotrophin doses (P < 0.0022) and had a shorter COS duration (P = 0.0019). No significant differences were observed in cycle cancellation rate, number of retrieved oocytes, number of MII oocytes, or fertilization rate. Pyridostigmine significantly accelerated GH levels over time compared to the Control group, with larger mean differences observed at each time point. The interaction between time and group indicated that the effect of the intervention on GH levels varied over the course of the COS cycle. Specifically, the intervention augmented the effect of COS agents on GH levels, as evidenced by the higher GH levels observed in the intervention group compared to the control group. For IGF-1 levels, time had a highly significant effect (P < 0.0001), but the interaction between Time and Group was not significant (P = 0.5067). Mean IGF-1 levels were higher in the Pyridostigmine group, though not statistically significant. CONCLUSION: Pyridostigmine improved COS efficiency by reducing gonadotrophin doses and COS duration. Further research is needed to explore its potential benefits in enhancing ovarian response in women with POR. TRIAL REGISTRY INFORMATION: Iranian Registry of Clinical Trials (IRCT). Registration date: 2023-08-05, Registration number: IRCT20100518003950N8.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical efficacy of Fufang Huangqi decoction in combination with pyridostigmine bromide tablets, prednisone, and tacrolimus in the treatment of type I and II myasthenia gravis (MG) through changes in the clinical symptom scores of 100 patients with type I and II MG. This study also aimed to examine dose reductions and dis-continuation of these 3 Western medicines after administration of Fufang Huangqi decoction. METHODS: The clinical data on 100 patients with type I or II MG who were treated in the outpatient department of the Affiliated Hospital of Liaoning University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, China, between June 2017 and June 2020 were collected. The patients were divided into 4 groups based on whether they had taken pyridostigmine bromide tablets, prednisone, and/or tacrolimus at the time of their hospital visit: the Fufang Huangqi decoction group (group A), the pyridostigmine bromide tablets + Fufang Huangqi decoction group (group B), the pyridostigmine bromide tablets + prednisone + Fufang Huangqi decoction group (group C), and the pyridostigmine bromide tablets + tacrolimus + Fufang Huangqi decoction group (group D). The average treatment time was (15.6 +/- 11.5) months (range: 0.5-55 months). Changes in the clinical symptom scores of the 4 groups of patients after medication administration and dose reductions and discontinuation of the 3 Western medicines were analyzed. RESULTS: An overall effectiveness rate of 86.00% was achieved in the 100 patients after treatment for (15.6 +/- 11.5) months (range 0.5-55 months). The effectiveness rates were 85.71% in group A, 88.24% in group B, 76.92% in group C, and 80.00% in group D. The dosage of pyridostigmine bromide was reduced for 69.12% of the patients in group B for the first time after (4.2 +/- 4.1) months, and 45.59% of the patients in group B discontinued pyridostigmine bromide after (8.8 +/- 6.1) months. The dosage of pyridostigmine bromide was reduced for 46.15% of the patients in group C for the first time after (5.3 +/- 3.4) months, and 23.08% of the patients in group C discontinued pyridostigmine bromide after (19.8 +/- 11.0) months; 76.92% reduced hormone dosage after (2.8 +/- 1.9) months, and 23.08% discontinued hormone treatment after (6.7 +/- 2.9) months. The dosage of pyridostigmine bromide was reduced for 1 patient in group D after 1 month; this patient discontinued pyridostigmine bromide after 3 months and reduced tacrolimus dosage after 5 months. One patient in group D discontinued pyridostigmine bromide and tacrolimus on his own initiative at 0.5 months and took Fufang Huangqi decoction for 2 months without discontinuing Western medicine. CONCLUSION: Fufang Huangqi decoction is effective for the treatment of type I and II MG and improves the associated clinical symptoms. Moreover, this agent is conducive to dose reductions and discontinuation of basic Western medicines, thereby reducing the side effects experienced by patients.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the GH secretion and clarify the factors influencing the GH secretion in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). DESIGN: Comparison of the GH response to L-dopa with or without pyridostigmine (inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase) pretreatment and insulin response to oral glucose tolerance test in patients with PCOS and matched controls. SETTING: Outpatients and healthy volunteers studied at a clinical research unit of a university hospital. PATIENTS, PARTICIPANTS: Ten women with PCOS and 9 controls with regular cycles were recruited. INTERVENTIONS: After an overnight fast, each subject underwent a GH stimulation test with L-dopa with or without pyridostigmine pretreatment. Plasma insulin and glucose levels were measured after a 75-g glucose load. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Plasma GH, insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), insulin, and nonesterified fatty acids. RESULTS: Growth hormone responses and GH area under the response curve (AUC) to L-dopa were significantly lower in PCOS than those in controls. Pyridostigmine enhanced the GH response to L-dopa significantly in PCOS. Insulin responses and insulin AUC to oral glucose load were significantly higher in PCOS than those in controls. Plasma IGF-I levels of PCOS were significantly higher than controls. Insulin AUC had a positive correlation with plasma IGF-I levels but an inverse correlation with GH AUC in PCOS and controls. CONCLUSION: Our result indicated that decreased GH secretion of PCOS may be associated with a high somatostatin activity and a high plasma IGF-I level.
Changes of weight and axial expansion of tablets of the deliquescent drug pyridostigmine bromide with Kollidon SR were followed with relative humidity (RH) using dynamic vapor sorption and displacement transducer. The effects of RH on placebo and drug containing (API) tablets prepared at low and high compression were related to tablet strength and molecular changes. Tablet weight and expansion increased with RH, especially above RH 40%. Tablet rigidity and strength decreased linearly with moisture for placebo tablets whereas for API tablets there was decrease up to 50% followed by large drop at 60%. Raman spectra of tablets did not show chemical interactions due to moisture, but decreased intensity of drug peak at 2370 cm(-1) indicating solid state changes. Decrease of polymer peak intensities at 805 and 1740 cm(-1) occurred only in API tablets implicating drug deliquescence in polymer moisture sorption. X-ray diffraction and thermal analysis of tablets indicated complete drug liquefaction after exposure at 60% RH, which impacted great loss of strength but did not affect the sustained release profile. In conclusion, monitoring of the physical properties of tablets during production of deliquescent drugs is necessary to avoid pitfalls during downstream processes such as coating, packaging and storage.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether short-term human exposure to pyridostigmine bromide, diethyltoluamide, and permethrin, at rest or under stress, adversely affects short-term physical or neurocognitive performance. PARTICIPANTS AND METHODS: A multicenter, prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial exposing 64 volunteers to permethrin-impregnated uniforms, diethyltoluamide-containing skin cream, oral pyridostigmine, and corresponding placebos was performed. Each participant had 4 separate sessions, ensuring exposure to all treatments and placebos under both stress and rest conditions in random order. Outcomes Included physical performance (handgrip strength and duration, stair climbing, and pull-ups [males] or push-ups [females]), neurocognitive performance (computerized tests), and self-reported adverse effects. RESULTS: Permethrin was undetectable in the serum of all participants; pyridostigmine levels were higher Immediately after stress (41.6 ng/mL; 95% confidence Interval, 35.1-48.1 ng/mL) than rest (23.0 ng/mL; 95% confidence Interval, 19.2-26.9 ng/mL), whereas diethyltoluamide levels did not significantly differ by stress condition. Heart rate and systolic blood pressure increased significantly with stress compared with rest but did not vary with treatment vs placebo. Physical and neurocognitive outcome measures and self-reported adverse effects did not significantly differ by exposure group. CONCLUSION: Combined, correct use of pyridostigmine, diethyltoluamide, and permethrin is well tolerated and without evidence of short-term physical or neurocognitive impairment.
Pyridostigmine is the most commonly used drug in the symptomatic treatment of myasthenia gravis (MG); however, research into its effectiveness and side effects is scarce. The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness, prevalence of side effects and net benefit of pyridostigmine. All MG patients participating in the Dutch-Belgian myasthenia patient registry were included. A dynamic online questionnaire was developed to assess the effectiveness, side effects and net benefit of pyridostigmine. Out of 642 invited patients, 410 patients (64%) fully completed the questionnaire; 61% reported that they currently used pyridostigmine, 36% had discontinued pyridostigmine and 2% reported to never have used pyridostigmine. Patients reported a median effectiveness of 60, IQR 28-78 and net benefit of 65, IQR 45-84. Of all patients currently using pyridostigmine, 91% reported side effects (vs. 55% in the control group). Most frequently reported side effects were flatulence, urinary urgency, muscle cramps, blurred vision and hyperhidrosis. In the group of patients who discontinued pyridostigmine, side effects were the reason for discontinuation in 26%. Diarrhea, abdominal cramps and muscle twitching were the most frequently cited reasons to discontinue pyridostigmine. These results can be used to guide shared decision making prior to starting symptomatic treatment for MG.
This study investigated the effects of pyridostigmine pretreatment, NBC protective gear, and heat-exercise exposure on psychomotor performance and subjective sensations in eight healthy male volunteers. Exercise in heat enhanced performance of vertical addition (+7.3%, p less than 0.001) but prolonged the reaction time (+4.4%, p less than 0.01). The effects of pyridostigmine, protective gear, and the interactions between the various stressors were not significant. Cognitive performance was not dependent on body core temperature. Multiple complaints of subjective discomfort arose from wearing the protective garment. The results suggest the existence of a significant subjective discomfort but an absence of major cognitive decrements in a multiple-stresses state of chemical warfare alertness.
Guanidine hydrochloride is known to be highly effective in the symptomatic treatment of the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS). However, because of its potentially dangerous side reactions of hematologic abnormalities and renal insufficiency, 3,4-diaminopyridine, which is not readily available in the United States, is recommended as the preferred drug for LEMS. We used low-dose guanidine and pyridostigmine combination therapy in 9 patients with LEMS and analyzed its long-term safety and effectiveness. In all patients, a liberal amount of pyridostigmine was used, while daily guanidine dose was kept below 1000 mg a day, and guanidine was given between pyridostigmine dosings. This combination therapy was used for 3-102 months (mean: 34.1 months) and improved clinical status in all patients. Although guanidine had to be discontinued due to severe gastrointestinal symptoms in 3 cases, no serious side reactions such as bone marrow suppressions or signs of renal insufficiency developed in any case. Thus, we conclude that low-dose guanidine therapy is relatively safe and effective for long-term symptomatic treatment of LEMS when it is combined with pyridostigmine.
