Three cases are described in which the cessation of the H2-antagonist ranitidine was followed by a rapid improvement in severe depressive symptoms. The literature concerning H2-receptor antagonists and depression is reviewed, and an alternative drug (omeprazole) for severe peptic ulceration is discussed.
Ranitidine (brand name: Zantac), an acid reducer, belongs to histamine-2 receptor antagonists. Since 1981, even though several adverse effects of this drug were reported in the body, still, its effects on human sperm parameters have yet to be confirmed. In this work, we attempted to measure sperm motility, sperm vitality and activity of seminal creatine kinase in the ejaculated human semen (n = 31) in the presence of ranitidine at a range of concentrations (0.1, 0.3, 0.6, 0.9 and 1.2 mug/ml) compared with control (without ranitidine). Sperm motility was measured using the Makler counter, whilst sperm vitality was assessed using the Eosin test. Creatine kinase activity was measured using the kinetic spectrophotometric method. Sperm motility (total and progressive) as well as sperm vitality was significantly (p < .05) reduced in the presence of ranitidine in human semen, particularly at the higher tested concentrations (0.6-1.2 mug/ml) compared with the control. On the other hand, creatine kinase activity was significantly increased (p < .05) in the presence of ranitidine at 0.6, 0.9 and 1.2 mug/ml. In conclusion, ranitidine at 0.6-1.2 mug/ml reduced sperm motility and vitality, but increased the activity of creatine kinase in ejaculated human semen.
To characterize and compare acid suppression (pharmacodynamics) and pharmacokinetics of IV famotidine and ranitidine in critically ill children at risk for stress gastritis. Single-blind, randomized study in PICU patients 6 months to 18 years requiring mechanical ventilation with continuous gastric pH monitoring, randomized to IV famotidine 12 mg/m(2) or ranitidine 60 mg/m(2) when gastric pH < 4.0 >1 hour with serial blood sampling following first dose. Twenty-four children randomized to either famotidine (n = 12) or ranitidine (n = 12). Sixteen out of twenty-four completed both PK and PD study arms (7/12 famotidine; 4.7 +/- 3.4 years; 9/12 ranitidine; 6.6 +/- 4.7 years; p = 0.38). Time to gastric pH 4.0 and total time pH above 4.0 similar with no difference in pH at 6 and 12 hours (p > 0.2). No difference between drugs in clearance, volume of distribution and half-life (p > 0.05). Ratio of AUC pH to AUC drug concentration 0-12 hours after first dose was significantly greater for famotidine (0.06849 +/- 0.01460 SD) than ranitidine (0.02453 +/- 0.01448; p < 0.001) demonstrating greater potency of famotidine. pH lowering efficacy of both drugs is similar. Greater potency of famotidine may offer clinical advantage due to lower drug exposure and less frequent dosing to achieve same pH lowering effect.
The conformational characteristics of two H2-receptor antagonists, cimetidine and ranitidine, have been investigated by quantum mechanical PCILO method and the results indicate a folded conformation for cimetidine stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen bonding and an extended backbone conformation for ranitidine. NMR investigations carried out on these two drugs in solution, however, indicate a predominance of an extended conformation for both the molecules. The significance of this result has been discussed in terms of the activity of these two drugs. Besides these studies, NMR experiments have also been carried out on the drugs incorporated into the lipid bilayers to investigate the drug-lipid interaction. The results from this study suggest that the hydrophobic portion of the drugs is buried in the hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains of the lipid bilayer, while the terminal hydrophilic end of the drug lies at the lipid-water interface.
Ranitidine HCl, a selective, competitive histamine H2-receptor antagonist with a short biological half-life, low bioavailability and narrow absorption window, is an ideal candidate for gastro-retentive drug delivery system (GRDDS). Controlled release with an optimum retentive formulation in the upper stomach would be an ideal formulation for this drug. The aim of the present study was therefore to develop, formulate and optimize floating, bioadhesive, and swellable matrix tablets of ranitidine HCl. The matrix tablets were prepared using a combination of hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (NaCMC) as release retarding polymers, sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3) as gas generating agent and microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) as direct compression diluent. Central composite design (CCD) was used to optimize the formulation and a total of thirteen formulations were prepared. Concentration of HPMC/NaCMC (3:1) (X1) and NaHCO3 (X2) were selected as independent variables; and floating lag time (Y1), bioadhesive strength (Y2), swelling index at 12 h (Y3), cumulative drug release at 1 h (Y4), time to 50% drug release (t50%) (Y5) and cumulative drug release at 12 h (Y6) were taken as the response variables. The optimized batch showed floating lag time of 5.09 sec, bioadhesive strength of 29.69 g, swelling index of 315.04% at 12 h, t50% of 3.86 h and drug release of 24.21% and 93.65% at 1h and 12 h, respectively, with anomalous release mechanism. The results indicate that sustained release matrix tablet of ranitidine HCl with combined floating, bioadhesive and swelling gastro-retentive properties can be considered as a strategy to overcome the low bioavailability and in vivo variation associated with the conventional ranitidine HCl tablet.
BACKGROUND: An effervescent formulation of ranitidine may be absorbed faster and achieve a faster onset of action than conventional tablet form. The aim of this study was to compare the effects of effervescent formulations of ranitidine with equivalent dose standard tablets, in terms of intragastric pH and plasma pharmacokinetics in the initial 6 h following dosing. METHODS: Fifteen fasting healthy males, aged 18-31 (mean 29) years, were each randomly given, at weekly intervals, 150 mg standard and effervescent ranitidine and 300 mg standard and effervescent ranitidine. Ambulatory gastric pH was performed and plasma drug levels measured at regular intervals. RESULTS: Plasma ranitidine levels increased more rapidly with both effervescent formulations compared with standard tablets as indicated by mean area under curve (AUC) at 1 h (P < 0.001). However, the pH profiles produced by all four treatments were similar with a steep rise in pH at 40-60 min to give a sustained level of pH 7 for the following 5 h. The effervescent formulations produced a transient rise in pH immediately following dosing, and for 300 mg this rise was significantly different at 10-20 min compared with the standard tablet (median pH 4.75 vs. 2.3, P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Plasma drug levels increase more rapidly following effervescent ranitidine. Effervescent and standard formulations of 150 and 300 mg are all equally effective in producing gastric pH 7 after 1 h. However, effervescent formulations produce an early transient rise in pH which may be of clinical benefit.
1. The pharmacokinetics of bismuth and ranitidine derived from oral doses of ranitidine bismuth citrate 800 mg given twice daily for 28 days were examined in this double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study in 27 healthy subjects. 2. Bismuth accumulation in plasma reflected its multicompartmental disposition, achieving the majority of predicted steady state within 14-28 days. Bismuth absorption from ranitidine bismuth citrate is limited (< 0.5% of the dose), and bismuth elimination is predominantly renal secretion. Peak plasma concentrations did not exceed 19 ng ml-1, remaining well below those associated with bismuth toxicity. Bismuth was measurable at low concentrations in plasma and urine for up to 5 months after the last dose. Plasma bismuth concentration-time data and urinary excretion data were best described by separate multicompartmental models, with terminal half-lives averaging 21 days and 45 days, respectively. 3. The pharmacokinetics of ranitidine derived from ranitidine bismuth citrate were similar to those of ranitidine administered alone. Ranitidine did not appreciably accumulate in plasma. 4. Ranitidine bismuth citrate was well-tolerated during 28 days of repeated dosing.
Ranitidine bismuth citrate, a new chemical entity which is a salt complex of ranitidine and bismuth citrate, is being developed for the treatment of relapse of benign gastric and duodenal ulcer and eradication of Helicobacter pylori. The aim of the present study was to establish whether ranitidine bismuth citrate (800 mg) or ranitidine hydrochloride (300 mg) have any effect on gastric emptying of a liquid meal using gamma scintigraphy. On three separate occasions, each of twelve subjects received a single oral tablet of 800 mg ranitidine bismuth citrate, 300 mg ranitidine hydrochloride or placebo in random order. Thirty minutes after dosing each subject was given 375 ml of 99mTc-DTPA (diethylene triaminepentaacetic acid) labelled Clinifeed-ISO. The primary endpoint was the time to 50% gastric emptying (t50%). The proportion of the meal remaining was summarised by weighted mean proportion of the meal remaining in the stomach over 0-60 min and 0-180 min, separately. No differences were observed for t50%, weighted mean 0-60 min, and weighted mean 0-180 min between any two treatments. In man, we have detected no significant effect of single oral doses of ranitidine bismuth citrate 800 mg or ranitidine hydrochloride 300 mg on the rate of gastric emptying of a liquid meal when compared with placebo.
Adverse reactions involving the central nervous system have been rarely reported with ranitidine, a H2-receptor antagonist. A 72 year old female is described that developed visual hallucinations shortly after initiation of ranitidine therapy. Rechallenge with the drug resulted in both visual and auditory hallucinations following a single dose.
This randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, multiclinic study of duodenal ulcer healing compared the efficacy and safety of enprostil with ranitidine. The six week trial admitted 164 patients with endoscopically demonstrated duodenal ulcer. Ratings of symptoms and adverse events were collated from patients' daily diaries, and endoscopy was repeated to verify healing after four weeks and, if appropriate, after six weeks. Medication used was enprostil (35 micrograms capsule) or ranitidine hydrochloride (150 mg tablet) with matching placebos twice daily. After six weeks, 81% of patients treated with enprostil and 95% of those treated with ranitidine had healed ulcers, a statistically significant difference (p = 0.007). There were no differences between treatment groups for the number of days until the daytime ulcer pain completely ceased. Night-time ulcer pain ceased significantly earlier in the group receiving ranitidine (p = 0.019) and was less severe during the week before the last visit (p = 0.001); daytime pain for ranitidine users was also less severe (p = 0.020) during this week. Mild to moderate adverse experiences were reported by 44% of enprostil and 35% of ranitidine patients. There were no severe adverse events. In conclusion, both enprostil and ranitidine were found to be safe and effective in the treatment of duodenal ulcer. However, the ranitidine regimen used in this trial produced better results than the enprostil regimen.
We assessed the pharmacokinetics and interaction of ABT-773 in 12 volunteers receiving ABT-773 alone or concomitantly with ranitidine or sucralfate. Data for 150 mg of ABT-773 were as follows: the maximum concentration of the drug in plasma (C(max)) was 318 ng/ml, its half-life was 5.66 h, and its area under the plasma concentration-time curve from 0 h to infinity (AUC(0- infinity )) was 1,662 ng. h/ml. Coadministration of ranitidine, reduced the C(max) (-25.7%) and AUC(0- infinity ) (-15.8%) significantly. Sucralfate had no impact on the bioavailability of ABT-773.
Ranitidine hydrochloride (RH) resinates were prepared by bath method using a highly acidic cation-exchange resin as the carrier. The drug-resinates combination pattern was characterized by DSC and X-ray diffraction. The influences of the types of the ion-exchange resin, initial RH concentration and the reaction temperature on the process of ion exchange were investigated. Three empirical kinetics models and thermodynamics equations were studied to the ion exchange process under different temperatures. The results showed that RH combined with ion-exchange resin not simple physical mixture but by ion bond, and the rate of ion exchange increased on increasing the initial drug concentration and reducing the temperature the resin. The in vitro drug release test showed that the release process was affected by the kind of countra-ion, ionic strength and temperature. Thermodynamics results showed that the ion exchange reaction between RH and cation-exchange resin was exothermic (DeltaH(theta)(r,m<) <0), and the drug release process could preferably be fitted with the first order equation. In conclusion, RH resinates were prepared by the bath method with strongly acidic cation-exchange (Amberlite(R) IRP69) with 5 mg/mL RH solution(100mL) stirred at 298K for 1h. Drug release from resinates was fitted with Viswanathan equation, and to achieve obvious sustained-release effect, the RH-resin complex should be further coated with a semipermeable membrane.
The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of ranitidine and famotidine were studied in 13 healthy elderly volunteers. On 3 mornings separated by a 1-week wash-out period, each subject received a single oral dose of ranitidine 300 mg, famotidine 40 mg, and placebo in a crossover, randomized fashion with double-dummy administration. Plasma and urine concentrations of ranitidine and famotidine were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography. Intragastric pH was measured for 24-hours with an antimony probe. Famotidine's plasma half-life (4.42 hrs) was significantly longer than ranitidine's (3.14 hrs, p < 0.05, paired t test). The 24-hour, area under the curve of pH profiles of the two drugs were significantly different from placebo (p < 0.05, analysis of variance and Fisher PLSD test) but not from each other. The duration of effect (defined as median pH > 4) was similar for ranitidine and famotidine, 10.3 and 9.9 hours, respectively (p = 0.713, paired Student's t test). Thus both agents exhibited a similar duration of 24-hour antisecretory response under these study conditions.
Omeprazole blocks the action of H+,K+-ATPase in the gastric mucosa and thus inhibits the secretion of hydrochloric acid. We conducted a double-blind multicenter study (45 centers in 13 countries) of 602 patients with benign gastric or prepyloric ulcers to compare the effectiveness of omeprazole (20 mg once daily, 203 patients, or 40 mg once daily, 194 patients) and ranitidine, an H2-receptor antagonist (150 mg twice daily, 205 patients) in promoting ulcer healing and to evaluate the pattern of ulcer relapse during a six-month follow-up. Healing occurred at four weeks in 80 percent of the patients receiving 40 mg of omeprazole, 69 percent of those receiving 20 mg of omeprazole, 69 percent of those receiving ranitidine. At eight weeks, the corresponding figures were 96, 89, and 85 percent. A multivariate analysis of ulcer healing showed that at four weeks the ulcers of significantly more patients receiving omeprazole had healed as compared with patients receiving ranitidine (omeprazole, 40 mg, vs. ranitidine, P less than 0.0005; omeprazole, 20 mg, vs. ranitidine, P = 0.01). At eight weeks, the 40-mg dose of omeprazole was significantly more effective than ranitidine (P = 0.001) or the 20-mg dose of omeprazole (P = 0.03). Ulcer symptoms were relieved faster with omeprazole. In 68 patients receiving concurrent nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, the healing rates at four weeks were 81 percent in the group receiving 40 mg of omeprazole, 61 percent in the group receiving 20 mg, and 32 percent in the group receiving ranitidine; at eight weeks, the corresponding figures were 95, 82, and 53 percent. During the six-month follow-up period (without treatment), significantly more patients in the omeprazole groups were free of symptoms and ulcers than in the ranitidine group. We conclude that in the dose used, omeprazole is superior to ranitidine in the treatment of benign gastric ulcers.
