More than 6 million people in the United States are affected by chronic angina. On January 27, 2006, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved a new medication for the treatment of chronic stable angina called ranolazine (Ranexa). This is the first angina drug approved by the FDA in over a decade. The unique thing about this drug is that it falls into a new class of therapies in that it works at the level of cellular metabolism in decreasing demand on the cardiac tissue. There are many factors to consider when prescribing this medication including past studies, dosing, and education. There is also evidence that this drug may also benefit diabetic patients with glycemic control.
Among the innovative drugs recently introduced for the management of chronic stable angina, Ranolazine and ivabradine represent two most true innovations. In fact, even if both drugs act by reducing myocardial work and thus oxygen consumption, this happens by a peculiar mechanism unlike that of conventional antischemic drugs. Ranolazine mediates its antianginal effects by the inhibition of cardiac late sodium current. This improves myocardial relaxation favoring myocardial perfusion. Ivabradine is a selective If channel blocker and acts by reducing firing rate of pacemaker cells in the sinoatrial node, without affecting the duration of action potential. The reduction of heart rate causes a reduction of left ventricular end diastolic pressure and increases the time useful to coronary flow by a prolongation of the diastole. A body of evidence found that two drugs are useful in ischemic patients whether at rest or during exercise. In addition, they can be used in monotherapy or in association with other conventional anti-ischemic drugs. The two medications could be used with advantage also in microvascular angina when standard therapy is ineffective. Thus, the two drugs represent an adjunctive and powerful therapeutic modality for the treatment of chronic stable angina, especially when conventional antianginal drugs were insufficient or inadequate.
The formulation and the coating composition of biopolymeric pellets containing ranolazine were studied to improve their technological and biopharmaceutical properties. Eudragit L100 (EU L100) and Eudragit L30 D-55-coated alginate and alginate-hydroxypropylcellulose (HPC) pellets were prepared by ionotropic gelation using 3 concentrations of HPC (0.50%, 0.65%, and 1.00% wt/wt) and applying different percentages (5%, 10%, 20%, and 30% wt/wt) of coating material. The uncoated pellets were regular in shape and had mean diameter between 1490 and 1570 mum. The rate and the entity of the swelling process were affected by the polymeric composition: increasing the HPC concentration, the structure of the pellets became more compact and slowed down the penetration of fluids. Coated alginate-HPC formulations were able to control the drug release at neutral pH: a higher quantity of HPC in the system determined a slower release of the drug. The nature of the coating polymer and the coating level applied affected the drug release in acidic environment: EU L100 gave better performance than Eudragit L30 D-55 and the best coating level was 20%. The pellets containing 0.65% of HPC and coated with 20% EU L100 represented the best formulation, able to limit the drug release in acidic environment and to control it at pH 6.8.
Chronic stable angina pectoris, the most prevalent symptomatic manifestation of coronary artery disease, greatly impairs quality of life and is associated with an increased risk for adverse cardiovascular outcomes. Better understanding of the pathophysiologic mechanisms of myocardial ischemia permitted new therapeutic strategies to optimize the management of angina patients. Ideally, antianginal drug treatment should be tailored to individual patient's profile and chosen according to the pathophysiology, hemodynamic profile, adverse effects, potential drug interactions and comorbidities. In this respect, and because of its peculiar mechanism of action, ranolazine represents an alternative therapeutic approach in patients with chronic stable angina and may be considered the first choice in presence of comorbidities that difficult the use of traditional therapies.
INTRODUCTION: Contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) is a common complication after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). There is conflicting evidence regarding efficacy of nicorandil in CIN prevention. With respect to ranolazine, there is physiological possibility as well as data in animal study regarding its protective effect against CIN; there is, however, no human data till date. AIM AND OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of nicorandil and ranolazine in preventing CIN. The secondary endpoint was to measure difference in postprocedure acute kidney injury (AKI) incidence across groups. Also, patients were followed up till 6 months for major adverse events. MATERIAL AND METHODS: This single-center randomized controlled study included 315 patients of coronary artery disease with mild-to-moderate renal dysfunction undergoing elective PCI. Eligible patients were assigned to either nicorandil (n = 105), ranolazine (n = 105) or control group (n = 105) in 1 : 1 : 1 ratio by block randomization. All enrolled patients were given intravenous sodium chloride at rate of 1.0 mL/kg/h (0.5 mL/kg/h for patients with left ventricular ejection fraction <45%) from 6 h before procedure till 12 h after procedure. Iso-osmolar contrast agent (iodixanol) was used for all patients. In addition to hydration, patients in nicorandil group received oral nicorandil (10 mg, 3 times/d) and those in ranolazine group received oral ranolazine (1000 mg, 2 times/d) 1 day before procedure and for 2 days after PCI. Patients in control group received only hydration. RESULTS: Total number of CIN was 34 (10.7%), which included 19 (18.1%) in control, 8 (7.6%) in nicorandil and 7 (6.6%) in ranolazine group. There was significant association of CIN reduction across groups ( P  = 0.012). On pairwise comparison also, there was significant benefit across control and ranolazine as well as control and nicorandil ( P  < 0.025). There was numerically higher incidence of AKI in controls; the difference, however, did not reach statistical significance after applying Bonferroni correction ( P  = 0.044). Over 6-month follow-up, adverse events were similar across groups. CONCLUSION: While this study adds to existing literature that supports role for nicorandil in CIN prevention, the efficacy of ranolazine in protecting against CIN has been demonstrated in humans for the first time.
PURPOSE: Ranolazine, an inhibitor of late inward sodium current, is an antianginal agent. In this study, the pharmacokinetic (PK) properties and tolerability of single- and multiple-dose ranolazine were compared between healthy Korean and white subjects. METHODS: An open-label, ascending single- and multiple-dose study was conducted with healthy male Korean and white subjects. Subjects were administered 375-750 mg of ranolazine once in a single-dose and twice daily in multiple-dose based on their dose groups. Blood samples for the PK assessment were collected up to 48 h after dosing. The geometric mean ratio and its 90% confidence interval in Korean to white subjects for C(max), C(max,ss), AUC(last), and AUC(0-12h,ss) of ranolazine were calculated. A population PK analysis was also performed. Safety profiles were assessed throughout the study. FINDINGS: A total of 70 Korean and 48 white subjects completed the study. Ranolazine exposure was similar between Korean and white subjects in all dose groups; however, ranolazine exposure at 750 mg was observed to increase by up to 29% in Korean subjects compared with that in white subjects. On the basis of previous studies, these differences in ranolazine exposure between the 2 ethnic groups may not result in any clinically significant difference. Furthermore, ethnicity was not significantly correlated with the PK properties of ranolazine in the ranolazine PK model. In addition, no significant difference was found in the safety profile of ranolazine between the 2 ethnic groups. IMPLICATIONS: The PK properties of ranolazine had no clinically significant difference, and no difference was found in the safety profiles of ranolazine between Korean and white subjects. It is anticipated that ranolazine can be administered in Korean subjects without dose adjustment. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02817932.
Ranolazine derives from piperazine and has been approved as a drug for the therapy of chronic stable angina. It acts by selectively inhibiting the late sodium inward current. Moreover, ranolazine has other metabolic features which makes it effective in other diseases as well as coronary artery ones. In this paper I make an updated review of all possible therapeutic roles of ranolazine: through cardiology and beyond.
INTRODUCTION: Recent evidence from relatively small randomized controlled trials would seem to support a useful role of ranolazine for the prevention and treatment of atrial fibrillation (AF). The present study is aimed at providing information about the possible beneficial anti-arrhythmic properties of ranolazine. In particular, the meta-analysis carried out in this study focuses on the application of ranolazine to prophylaxis and treatment of atrial fibrillation. EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: Both methods randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and non-randomized observational studies concerning the effects of ranolazine on AF were included in the meta-analysis. In each of the considered studies, a comparison was made between a group of patients taking ranolazine and a second group treated instead with another antiarrhythmic therapy, or assigned to placebo. Efficacy outcomes were the risk of new-onset AF, the probability of conversion to sinus rhythm of patients with recent occurrence (</=48 h) of AF and the time to conversion to sinus rhythm. Safety endpoints were death, adverse events, QTc prolongation and hypotension. EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: Ten studies (8 RCTs and 2 nonrandomized observational studies) were gathered on the whole. Ranolazine was effective in preventing the occurrence of AF when compared to controls (RR=0.60; 95% CI: 0.43-0.83; P=0.002). Subgroup analysis showed a more pronounced preventive effect of ranolazine against AF in the postoperative setting of coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) surgery (RR=0.39; 95% CI: 0.18-0.83; P=0.02) when compared to non-postoperative AF (RR=0.76; 95% CI: 0.63-0.92; P=0.04). Ranolazine enhanced the chances of successful cardioversion when added to intravenous amiodarone compared to amiodarone alone (RR 1.18; 95% CI: 1.05-1.33; P=0.004) and significantly decreased the time to cardioversion (SMD= -10.35 h; 95% CI: -18.13 hours to -2.57 hours; P<0.001). Overall risks of death, adverse events, and QTc prolongation were shown to be similar in the comparison between patients treated with ranolazine and controls. CONCLUSIONS: Ranolazine given orally at appropriate doses showed the property to significantly quicken the conversion of AF to sinus rhythm when combined with the IV amiodarone, compared to IV amiodarone alone. Furthermore, in patients in sinus rhythm, ranolazine proved to reduce the frequency of new onset AF as well as of its recurrences, especially in patients undergone CABG surgery, known to be at high risk of developing postoperative AF. In addition, ranolazine use seems to be safe and associated with relatively few adverse events.
INTRODUCTION: Pharmacological rhythm control of atrial fibrillation (AF) in patients with structural heart disease is limited. Ranolazine in combination with low dose dronedarone remarkably reduced AF-burden in the phase II HARMONY trial. We thus aimed to investigate the possible mechanisms underlying these results. METHODS AND RESULTS: Patch clamp experiments revealed that ranolazine (5muM), low-dose dronedarone (0.3muM), and the combination significantly prolonged action potential duration (APD90) in atrial myocytes from patients in sinus rhythm (prolongation by 23.5+/-0.1%, 31.7+/-0.1% and 25.6+/-0.1% respectively). Most importantly, in atrial myocytes from patients with AF ranolazine alone, but more the combination with dronedarone, also prolonged the typically abbreviated APD90 (prolongation by 21.6+/-0.1% and 31.9+/-0.1% respectively). It was clearly observed that neither ranolazine, dronedarone nor the combination significantly changed the APD or contractility and twitch force in ventricular myocytes or trabeculae from patients with heart failure (HF). Interestingly ranolazine, and more so the combination, but not dronedarone alone, caused hyperpolarization of the resting membrane potential in cardiomyocytes from AF. As measured by confocal microscopy (Fluo-3), ranolazine, dronedarone and the combination significantly suppressed diastolic sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) leak in myocytes from sinus rhythm (reduction by ranolazine: 89.0+/-30.7%, dronedarone: 75.6+/-27.4% and combination: 78.0+/-27.2%), in myocytes from AF (reduction by ranolazine: 67.6+/-33.7%, dronedarone: 86.5+/-31.7% and combination: 81.0+/-33.3%), as well as in myocytes from HF (reduction by ranolazine: 64.8+/-26.5% and dronedarone: 65.9+/-29.3%). CONCLUSIONS: Electrophysiological measurements during exposure to ranolazine alone or in combination with low-dose dronedarone showed APD prolongation, cellular hyperpolarization and reduced SR Ca(2+) leak in human atrial myocytes. The combined inhibitory effects on various currents, in particular Na(+) and K(+) currents, may explain the anti-AF effects observed in the HARMONY trial. Therefore, the combination of ranolazine and dronedarone, but also ranolazine alone, may be promising new treatment options for AF, especially in patients with HF, and merit further clinical investigation.
BACKGROUND: Amiodarone (AMIO) is for many years effectively used to control ventricular rate during atrial fibrillation (AF) and to convert it into sinus rhythm. However, due to its delayed onset of action, ranolazine (RAN), a new antianginal agent with atrial-selective electrophysiologic properties, has recently been attempted as add-on therapy with AMIO to facilitate AF conversion. METHODS: To establish the role of this combination therapy, we enrolled 173 consecutive patients (68 +/- 10 years, 54% male) with recent-onset (<48-hour duration) AF who were eligible for pharmacologic cardioversion. Patients were randomized to intravenous AMIO (loading dose 5 mg/kg in 1 hour followed by 50 mg/h; n = 81), or AMIO plus a single oral dose of RAN 1 g (n = 92). RESULTS: Mean left atrial diameter did not significantly differ between groups, AMIO and AMIO + RAN (4.2 +/- 0.5 cm vs 4.1 +/- 0.4 cm, P = 0.18). The AMIO + RAN group compared with the AMIO-only group showed significantly shorter time to conversion (8.6 +/- 2.8 hours vs 19.4 +/- 4.4 hours, P < 0.0001) and higher conversion rate at 24 hours (98% vs 58%, P < 0.001). Left ventricular ejection fraction did not markedly vary between the two groups and ranged within moderately reduced values. No serious clinically evident adverse effects were observed in any of the patients receiving either AMIO or the combination treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate faster sinus rhythm restoration and enhanced conversion rate of AF after AMIO plus RAN in patients with preserved ejection fraction and left atrial size, implicating a synergistic effect of the two agents.
BACKGROUND: Ranolazine is a second-line drug for the management of chronic coronary syndromes (CCS). Glucose-lowering and endothelial effects have also been reported with this agent. However, whether ranolazine may improve short-term glycemic variability (GV), strictly related to the prognosis of patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D), is unknown. Thus, we aimed to explore the effects of adding ranolazine to standard anti-ischemic and glucose-lowering therapy on long- and short-term GV as well as on endothelial function and oxidative stress in patients with T2D and CCS. METHODS: Patients starting ranolazine (n = 16) were evaluated for short-term GV, haemoglobin 1Ac (Hb1Ac) levels, endothelial-dependent flow-mediated vasodilation (FMD), and oxidative stress levels at enrolment and after 3-month follow-up. The same measurements were collected from 16 patients with CCS and T2D that did not receive ranolazine, matched for age, gender, and body mass index. RESULTS: A significant decline in Hb1Ac levels was reported after 3-month ranolazine treatment (mean change -0.60%; 2-way ANOVA p = 0.025). Moreover, among patients receiving ranolazine, short-term GV indexes were significantly improved over time compared with baseline (p = 0.001 for time in range; 2-way ANOVA p = 0.010). Conversely, no significant changes were reported in patients without ranolazine. Finally, greater FMD and lower oxidative stress levels were observed in patients on ranolazine at 3 months. CONCLUSIONS: Ranolazine added to standard anti-ischemic and glucose-lowering therapy demonstrated benefit in improving the glycemic status of patients with T2D and CCS. How this improvement contributes to the overall myocardial benefit of ranolazine requires further studies.
A case of unstable angina developed slow junctional rhythm with QTc prolongation and transient Torsades de pointes following simultaneous use of Ivabradine, Diltiazem and Ranolazine. Effect of Diltiazem on hepatic isoenzyme CYP 3A could be responsible. Such a combination should be avoided.
