We conducted a meta-analysis to compare the efficacy and safety of repaglinide plus metformin with metformin alone on type 2 diabetes. Twenty-two studies were included in this meta-analysis. Results showed combination therapy was safe and could gain better outcomes in glycemic control. Well-designed studies are required to confirm this conclusion.
For point-of-care testing of the illegal fortification of repaglinide (Rep) in natural dietary supplements, a competitive chemiluminescent immunoassay (CLIA) was established, using a horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-luminol-H2O2 system for signal amplification. Polyclonal antibodies for Rep were produced via immunization technique. Following optimization of the enzyme reaction time and concentrations of antibody and coating antigen, the method showed a limit of quantification (LOQ) of 1.0 ng/mL in PBS and limit of detection (LOD) of 8.3 ng/mL in serum and 6.0 ng/mL in blank tablets. When applied in natural dietary supplements, the method provided results consistent with those from HPLC, suggesting that the proposed method could be used for rapid screening of Rep in natural dietary supplements and detecting Rep in serum after administration.
Metformin HCl (MET) is a mostly used antidiabetic drug and several fixed-dose combinations are available in the market with other antidiabetic drugs for the treatment of insulin-independent diabetes. Numerous chromatographic methods have been reported for the estimation of multiple fixed dose combination (FDC) of MET but each FDC needs a separate and dedicated chromatographic method for analysis. No chromatographic method has been reported yet in the literature which promotes synchronous estimation of multiple FDCs of MET to minimize organic solvent consumption, time and cost of analysis. Hence, the multipurpose-high performance thin layer chromatography (HPTLC) method was developed for the synchronous estimation of FDCs of MET by the implementation of an enhanced analytical quality by design approach. Principal component analysis was applied for the identification of critical method risk parameters. Box-Behnken design was applied for response surface analysis. The method operable design ranges was navigated and the control strategy was framed. The developed method was applied for the analysis of multiple FDCs of metformin. The developed method can synchronously analyze multiple FDCs of MET which required several chromatographic methods. Hence, the present method is multipurpose-HPTLC for the synchronous estimation of multiple FDCs of MET which required minimum organic solvent, time and cost of analysis.
A simple and highly sensitive spectrofluorimetric method was developed and validated for determination of the antidiabetic agent repaglinide (RG) in tablets. The proposed method is based on measurement of the native fluorescence of RG in 0.1 M H(2)SO(4)/methanol medium at 360 nm after excitation at 243 nm. The method showed a linear dependence of the relative fluorescence intensity on drug concentration over the range of 0.02-0.50 mug mL(-1) with lower detection limit of 6.0 ng mL(-1) and lower quantification limit of 18 ng mL(-1). The method was successfully applied for determination of RG in different tablets and the obtained results were in good agreement with those obtained by the official method. The proposed method was extended to investigate the kinetics of oxidative degradation of the drug. A proposal for the degradation pathway was postulated.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to summarize the potential impact of CYP2C8 and SLCO1B1 genetic polymorphisms on repaglinide pharmacokinetics. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted using electronic databases. Eligible studies reported data from pharmacokinetic evaluations of repaglinide in healthy adults according to different categories of CYP2C8 and SLCO1B1 genetic polymorphisms. RESULTS: Six studies including a total of 191 participants met the inclusion criteria. We noted that CYP2C8 *1/*3 carriers exhibited lower AUC(0-infinity) (SMD: -0.77; 95%CI: -1.23 to -0.30; P=0.001) and Cmax (SMD: -0.94; 95%CI: - 1.41 to -0.47; P<0.001) than CYP2C8 *1/*1 carriers. There were no significant differences in AUC(0-infinity), Cmax, t1/2 and mean change in blood glucose concentration between *1/*4 and *1/*1 carriers. Further, *3/*3 carriers had lower Cmax (SMD: -1.42; 95%CI: -2.66 to -0.17; P=0.026) than *1/*1 carriers. Additionally, *3/*3 carriers had lower Cmax than *1/*3 carriers (SMD: -1.20; 95%CI: -2.40 to -0.00; P=0.050). Finally, we noted that repaglinide pharmacokinetics did not differ by SLCO1B1 genotype. CONCLUSION: The current systematic review and meta-analysis indicated that the genotype of CYP2C8, but not SLCO1B1, may affect repaglinide pharmacokinetics. However, because of the comparatively insufficient number of published studies included, our conclusions require support from additional studies.
Repaglinide solid lipid nanoparticles (RG-SLN) were fabricated using stearic acid as lipid. Pluronic F68 (PLF68) and soya lecithin were used as a stabilizer. SLNs were prepared by modified solvent injection and ultrasonication methods. SLNs prepared with modified solvent injection method have larger particle size (360+/-2.5nm) than prepared with ultrasonication method (281+/-5.3nm). The zeta potential of the prepared formulations by these two methods varied from - 23.10 +/-1.23 to -26.01 +/-0.89 mV. The maximum entrapment efficiency (62.14 +/-1.29%) was obtained in modified solvent injection method. The total drug content was nearly same (98%) in both the methods. In vitro release studies were performed in phosphate buffer (pH 6.8) with 0.5% sodium lauryl sulphate (SLS) using dialysis bag diffusion technique. The cumulative drug release was 30% and 50% within 2 hrs in modified solvent injection and ultrasonication method, respectively. This indicates that RG-SLN prepared from modified injection method released the drug more slowly than SLNs prepared with ultrasonication method. Differential scanning calorimetry indicates that repaglinide (RG) entrapped in the solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN) exist in an amorphous or molecular state. Repaglinide loaded solid lipid nanoparticles prepared with both methods were of spherical shape as observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). These results suggest that modified solvent injection method is more suitable for preparation of repaglinide SLNs using stearic acid.
Oral repaglinide (GlucoNorm(R); NovoNorm(R); Prandin(R); Surepost(R)) is a rapid-acting insulin secretagogue that lowers postprandial glucose (PPG) excursions by targeting early-phase insulin release, with reductions in PPG considered to be important in reducing long-term cardiovascular complications of diabetes mellitus. Repaglinide, a carbamoylbenzoic acid derivative, is chemically related to the meglitinide class of insulin secretagogues, but unrelated to the sulfonylurea insulin secretagogues. Meglitinides, including repaglinide, have a distinct binding site at the beta-cell membrane, which differs from that of sulfonylureas, and corresponds to greater insulinotropic effects with repaglinide than with glibenclamide and/or glimepiride and a more rapid onset of action in in vitro and in vivo studies. This article reviews the clinical efficacy and tolerability of oral repaglinide in the treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes and provides an overview of its pharmacological properties. In well designed clinical trials of up to 52 weeks' duration and in the clinical practice setting, recommended dosages of repaglinide (0.5-4 mg three times daily up to 30 minutes prior to a meal) provided effective glycaemic control and were generally well tolerated in treatment-naive or -experienced adult patients with type 2 diabetes, including elderly patients and those with renal impairment. Furthermore, as monotherapy or in combination with other oral antihyperglycaemic drugs, repaglinide was at least as effective as other oral antihyperglycaemic drugs at improving or maintaining glycaemic control, with a tolerability profile that was generally similar to that of sulfonylurea drugs and nateglinide. Thus, repaglinide remains an effective option for the management of patients with type 2 diabetes.
High-performance affinity microcolumns were used to characterize binding by the anti-diabetic drugs repaglinide and nateglinide with normal and glycated forms of human serum albumin. The microcolumns contained only nmol amounts of protein and provided a detailed analysis of these drug interactions with good precision and in a matter of minutes per experiment. The overall binding by repaglinide to normal and glycated albumin fits a model with two types of binding sites: a set of one or two moderate-to-high affinity regions and a larger set of weaker regions with association equilibrium constants of  approximately 10(5) and 10(3)  M(-1) , respectively, at pH 7.4 and 37 degrees C. Competition studies gave site-specific association constants for repaglinide and nateglinide at Sudlow site I of 4.2 x 10(4) and 5.0 x 10(4)  M(-1) for normal albumin, with a decrease of 26%-30% being seen for nateglinide with glycated albumin and no significant change being noted for repaglinide. At Sudlow site II, repaglinide and nateglinide had association constants for normal albumin of 6.1 x 10(4) and 7.1 x 10(5)  M(-1) , with glycated albumin giving an increase in the association constant at this site for repaglinide of 1.6- to 1.8-fold and a decrease for nateglinide of 51%-58%.
BACKGROUND: Combination therapy with an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor or glinide plus a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor is thought to be effective for glycemic control because of its effects on postprandial hyperglycemia. However, no studies have directly compared these two combination therapies in relation to efficacy and safety. METHODS: Eighteen patients with type 2 diabetes were studied. All had diabetes not adequately controlled with diet and exercise therapy, an HbA1c level of >/=7.5%, and were not receiving any medication for diabetes. The patients were randomized to either miglitol- or repaglinide-based combination therapy with alogliptin. Patients received miglitol or repaglinide monotherapy for 3 months (the miglitol and repaglinide groups, respectively), after which alogliptin was added to each group as combination therapy for 3 months. A meal tolerance test (MTT) was performed before the start of treatment and at the end of monotherapy and combination therapy. RESULTS: During the study period, decreases in HbA1c and glycated albumin were significantly greater in the repaglinide group than in the miglitol group; however, there was no significant difference between treatment groups at the end of the study. At the end of monotherapy, insulin secretion relative to glucose elevation (ISG(0-30): area under the curve of insulin from 0 to 30 min during MTT [AUC(0-30) of IRI]/AUC(0-30) of plasma glucose) was significantly higher only in the repaglinide group; ISG(0-30) did not significantly increase in either group after the addition of alogliptin. CONCLUSIONS: The addition of alogliptin to repaglinide monotherapy did not cause glucose-independent inappropriate insulin secretion and did not appear to increase the incidence of hypoglycemia.
This nested case-control study evaluated the potential interaction between repaglinide and clopidogrel. Cases were defined by inpatient admissions or emergency department visits due to hypoglycemia. Concomitant use of repaglinide and clopidogrel within 3 days before the hypoglycemic event was the exposure of interest. For each case, up to four controls were randomly selected and matched by age, sex, type of glinide used (repaglinide or nateglinide), and time since cohort entry to the index date. Hypoglycemic risk was estimated by conditional logistic regressions. Concomitant use of repaglinide and clopidogrel was associated with an increased risk of hypoglycemia compared with repaglinide alone (adjusted odds ratio: 2.42; 95% confidence interval: 1.75-3.35). No significant associations were found with the two negative control object drug concomitants: nateglinide and clopidogrel and repaglinide and aspirin (without clopidogrel use). Our study suggests drug interaction between clopidogrel and repaglinide is clinically relevant and could increase the risk for hypoglycemia.
OBJECTIVE: Diabetes, a common endocrine and metabolic disease in clinical practice, generally manifests a certain defect in insulin secretion due to several factors, thereafter leading to a metabolic disorder such as hyperglycemia. This study was conducted to explore the clinical effects of repaglinide combined with exercise rehabilitation on improving the blood glucose of patients with diabetes. METHODS: In this retrospective study, 100 patients with diabetes treated in our hospital from January 2018 to January 2020 were assessed for eligibility and recruited. They were assigned at a ratio of 1 : 1 to receive either repaglinide (control group) or repaglinide plus exercise rehabilitation (experimental group). Outcome measures include fasting blood glucose, 2 h postprandial blood glucose, glycosylated hemoglobin, time to normal blood glucose, blood glucose fluctuation, insulin dosage, adverse reactions, and blood glucose adequate rate. RESULTS: All eligible patients showed similar pretreatment fasting blood glucose, glycosylated hemoglobin, and 2 h postprandial blood glucose (P > 0.05). After treatment, repaglinide plus exercise rehabilitation resulted in lower levels of fasting blood glucose, glycosylated hemoglobin, and 2 h postprandial blood glucose versus repaglinide alone (P < 0.05). Repaglinide plus exercise rehabilitation was associated with a significantly shorter time to normal blood glucose and a milder fluctuation versus repaglinide (P < 0.05). The incidence of adverse reactions and blood glucose adequate rate was 6% and 94% in the experimental group and 50% and 52% in the control group, respectively (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Repaglinide plus exercise rehabilitation results in effective blood glucose control and reduced incidence of adverse reactions and yields a promising efficacy, so it is worthy of clinical promotion and application.
