Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder for which the only licensed treatment is riluzole. Although riluzole clinical efficacy is rather limited, its use has important implications for identifying those parameters that might improve its clinical benefits (dose, timing, disease stage) and for its off-label administration in other neurodegenerative diseases, such as spinal cord injury. Studies of riluzole also have an intrinsically heuristic value to unveil mechanisms regulating the excitability of brain and spinal neurons because this drug is a pharmacological tool to probe the function of certain ion channels, or to study neurotransmitter release processes, and intracellular neuroprotective pathways. The present review focuses on how riluzole acts on brain and spinal neurons within motor networks, what mechanisms can be deduced from its effects, and what conditions may favor its use to contrast neurodegeneration or to ameliorate late symptoms like spasticity. Taking as an example the experimental neurodegeneration caused by overactivation of glutamatergic synapses (excitotoxicity), it seems likely that protection of motor networks by riluzole involves selected administration timing and dosing to target processes for releasing glutamate from very active synapses or for dampening repetitive firing by hyperfunctional motor cells.
There is a pressing need for better pharmacological treatment strategies for psychiatric disorders as current treatment often results in partial symptom remission and unwanted side effects. A point of entry may be the glutamatergic system since glutamatergic dysregulation contributes to multiple psychiatric disorders. We evaluated the evidence from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) regarding the use of the glutamatergic drug riluzole in mental illnesses; and conducted preliminary meta-analyses of its effectiveness in treating obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and depression. A systematic search was performed using PubMed (Medline), Embase, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and PsycINFO. Meta-analyses were performed using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis software. Twenty-three RCTs were included for qualitative analysis and showed positive effects of adjunctive/monotherapy riluzole in patients with OCD, depression, autism, substance abuse and schizophrenia. Seven studies were also used for quantitative analysis, which revealed positive but non-significant effects on OCD and depression. Riluzole was generally well tolerated with few serious adverse events. The studies included in this systematic review were highly heterogeneous and the number of studies was limited per diagnostic condition. Moreover, few studies have examined riluzole as a single treatment. We suggest carrying out further work to provide definitive evidence for the benefit of riluzole in psychiatric illness.
Glutamatergic modulators may have therapeutic potential in the treatment of depressive disorder (DD), riluzole, as a modulating drug of the glutamatergic system, its antidepressant efficacy and safety of riluzole for DD are inconsistent. This meta-analysis was performed to determine the efficacy and safety of riluzole used for DD. A systematic literature search was performed using PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, Web of Science, VIP and other databases from 1980 to 2019. The primary outcome was change in depression severity and meta-analysis was performed using comprehensive meta-analysis software. Seven randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were included. There was some difference in depression severity change in riluzole-citalopram therapy. No significant differences were observed in response rate, remission rate, relapse rate and adverse events, while, the relapse time in riluzole group was longer than placebo group. In this meta-analysis riluzole showed no antidepressant efficacy compared to placebo in monotherapy or riluzole-ketamine combined therapy, while it might relieve depression severity to some extent in riluzole-citalopram therapy. Furthermore, riluzole showed favorable safety for DD. The longer relapse time of riluzole group might have clinical significance to some extent, although this had no statistical difference. More studies are needed to clarify the potential association between riluzole and DD.
BACKGROUND: Riluzole is approved for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in most countries. Questions persist about its clinical utility because of high cost and modest efficacy. OBJECTIVES: To examine the efficacy of riluzole in prolonging survival and in delaying the use of surrogates (tracheostomy and mechanical ventilation) to sustain survival, and to assess the effect of riluzole upon functional health. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Neuromuscular Disease Group Specialized Register (20 April 2011), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (2011, Issue 2), MEDLINE (1966 to April 2011), EMBASE (1980 to May 2011) and made enquiries of authors of trials, Aventis (manufacturer of riluzole) and other experts in the field. SELECTION CRITERIA: Types of studies: randomized controlled trials TYPES OF PARTICIPANTS: adults with a diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Types of interventions: treatment with riluzole or placebo Types of outcome measures: Primary: pooled hazard ratio of tracheostomy-free survival over all time points with riluzole 100 mg. Secondary: per cent mortality with riluzole 50 mg, 100 mg and 200 mg; neurologic function, muscle strength and adverse events. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: One author performed data extraction and two other authors checked them. One author checked the data and entered them into the computer. The other authors verified the data entry. We obtained missing data from the trial authors whenever possible. MAIN RESULTS: The four trials examining tracheostomy-free survival included a total of 974 riluzole-treated patients and 503 placebo-treated patients. No new randomized controlled trials were found when we updated the searches for this update in 2011. The methodological quality was acceptable and three trials were easily comparable, although one trial (169 participants) included older patients in more advanced stages of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and one (195 participants) had multiple primary endpoints. Riluzole 100 mg per day provided a benefit for the homogeneous group of patients in the first two trials (hazard ratio (HR) 0.80, 95% confidence internal (CI) 0.64 to 0.99, P= 0.042) and there was no evidence of heterogeneity (P = 0.33). When the third trial (which included older and more seriously affected patients) was added, there was evidence of heterogeneity (P < 0.0001) and the overall treatment effect was reduced but still significant (HR 0.84, 95% CI 0.698 to 0.997, P= 0.046). This represented a 9% gain in the probability of surviving one year (49% in the placebo and 58% in the riluzole group), and increased median survival from 11.8 to 14.8 months. There was a small beneficial effect on both bulbar and limb function, but not on muscle strength. A three-fold increase in serum alanine transferase was more frequent in riluzole-treated patients than controls (mean difference 2.62, 95% CI 1.59 to 4.31). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Riluzole 100 mg daily is reasonably safe and probably prolongs median survival by about two to three months in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Damage to the spinal cord (SC) can result in irreversible impairments or complete loss of motor, sensory, and autonomic functions. Riluzole, a sodium channel-blocker and glutamate inhibitor, is in preclinical use for SC injury (SCI), and curcumin is an intracellular calcium inhibitor that attenuates glutamate-induced neurotoxicity. As riluzole and curcumin have different mechanisms to protect against SCI, we aimed to investigate the neuroprotective effects of a combination of riluzole and curcumin in human astrocytes and white matter injury (WMI) model of SCI. Our data show that a combination of riluzole (1 muM) and curcumin (1 muM) was effective in inhibiting hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2))-induced oxidative dress in astrocytes derived from human SC, however, curcumin alone showed a significant inhibition. In addition, our results demonstrated that curcumin alone downregulates the hypoxia-induced expression of HIF-1, GFAP, and NF-H proteins in WMI, whereas riluzole alone and in combination with curcumin remained ineffective in changing the expression of these proteins. Contrarily, after inhibiting Ca(2+) influx with EGTA, riluzole alone and in combination with curcumin significantly downregulated hypoxia-induced expression of GFAP and NF-H. After analysis of caspase 9 and cleaved caspase 9, we observed that curcumin and riluzole both inhibit apoptosis significantly, whereas their combination remains ineffective. Furthermore, we observed that neuroprotective effects of curcumin and riluzole are mediated through Nrf2/HO-1 signaling. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that curcumin and riluzole protect astrocytes from oxidative stress and white matter from hypoxia. However, their combination is not beneficial to reduce hypoxia-induced astrocytosis, axonal damage, and apoptosis. From our results, it is evident that curcumin is more effective in reducing WMI than riluzole.
To date, no drug therapy has shown significant efficacy in improving functional outcomes in patients with acute spinal cord injury (SCI). Riluzole is an approved benzothiazole sodium channel blocker to attenuate neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and is of interest for neuroprotection in SCI. In a Phase I clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00876889), riluzole was well tolerated with a 2-week treatment at the dose level approved for ALS and exhibited potential efficacy in patients with SCI. The acute and progressive nature of traumatic SCI and the complexity of secondary injury processes alter the pharmacokinetics (PK) of therapeutics. In the PK sub-study of the multi-center, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blinded Riluzole in Spinal Cord Injury Study (RISCIS) Phase II/III trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01597518), a total of 32 SCI patients were enrolled, and most of our patients were middle-age Caucasian males with head and neck injuries. We studied the PK and pharmacodynamics (PD) of riluzole on motor recovery, measured by International Standards for Neurological Classification of SCI (ISNCSCI) Motor Score at injury and at 3-month and 6-month follow-ups, along with levels of the axonal injury biomarker phosphorylated neurofilament heavy chain (pNF-H), during the 2-week treatment. PK modeling, PK/PD correlations were developed to identify the potential effective exposure of riluzole for intended PD outcomes. The longitudinal impacts of SCI on the PK of riluzole are characterized. A time-varying population PK model of riluzole is established, incorporating time-varying clearance and volume of distribution from combined data of Phase I and Phase II/III trials. With the developed model, a rational, optimal dosing scheme can be designed with time-dependent modification to preserve the required therapeutic exposure of riluzole. The PD of riluzole and the relationship between PK and neurological outcomes of the treatment were established. The time course of efficacy in total motor score improvement (DeltaTMS) and pNF-H were monitored. A three-dimensional (3D) PK/PD correlation was established for DeltaTMS at 6 months with overall riluzole exposure area under the curve for Day 0-Day14 (AUC(D0-D14)) and baseline TMS for individual patients. Patients with baseline TMS between 1 and 36 benefited from the optimal exposure range of 16-48 mg*h/mL. The PD models of pNF-H revealed the riluzole efficacy, as treated subjects exhibited a diminished increase in progression of pNF-H, indicative of reduced axonal breakdown. The independent parameter of area between effective curves (ABEC) between the time profiles of pNF-H in placebo and treatment groups was statistically identified as a significant predictor for the treatment effect on the biomarker. A mechanistic clinical outcomes (CO)/PD (pNF-H) model was established, and the proposed structure demonstrated the feasibility of PK/PD/CO correlation model. No appreciable hepatic toxicity was observed with the current riluzole treatment regimen. The development of effective treatment for SCI is challenging. However, the future model-informed and PK-guided drug development and regimen modification can be rationally executed with the optimal dosing regimen design based on the developed 3D PK/PD model. The PK/PD/CO model can serve as a rational guide for future drug development, PKPD model refinement, and extension to other studies in SCI settings.
Objective: To assess masitinib in the treatment of ALS. Methods: Double-blind study, randomly assigning 394 patients (1:1:1) to receive riluzole (100 mg/d) plus placebo or masitinib at 4.5 or 3.0 mg/kg/d. Following a blinded transition from phase 2 to phase 2/3, a prospectively defined two-tiered design was implemented based on ALSFRS-R progression rate from disease-onset to baseline (DeltaFS). This approach selects a more homogeneous primary efficacy population ("Normal Progressors", DeltaFS < 1.1 points/month) while concurrently permitting secondary assessment of the broader population. Primary endpoint was decline in ALSFRS-R at week-48 (DeltaALSFRS-R), with the high-dose "Normal Progressor" cohort being the prospectively declared primary efficacy population. Missing data were imputed via last observation carried forward (LOCF) methodology with sensitivity analyses performed to test robustness. Results: For the primary efficacy population, masitinib (n = 99) showed significant benefit over placebo (n = 102) with a DeltaALSFRS-R between-group difference (DeltaLSM) of 3.4 (95% CI 0.65-6.13; p = 0.016), corresponding to a 27% slowing in rate of functional decline (LOCF methodology). Sensitivity analyses were all convergent, including the conservative multiple imputation technique of FCS-REGPMM with a DeltaLSM of 3.4 (95% CI 0.53-6.33; p = 0.020). Secondary endpoints (ALSAQ-40, FVC, and time-to-event analysis) were also significant. Conversely, no significant treatment-effect according to DeltaALSFRS-R was seen for the broader "Normal and Fast Progressor" masitinib 4.5 mg/kg/d cohort, or either of the low-dose (masitinib 3.0 mg/kg/d) cohorts. Rates of treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs) (regardless of causality or post-onset DeltaFS) were 88% with masitinib 4.5 mg/kg/d, 85% with 3.0 mg/kg/d, and 79% with placebo. Likewise, rates of serious AE were 31, 23, and 18%, respectively. No distinct event contributed to the higher rate observed for masitinib and no deaths were related to masitinib. Conclusions: Results show that masitinib at 4.5 mg/kg/d can benefit patients with ALS. A confirmatory phase 3 study will be initiated to substantiate these data.
IMPORTANCE: The modified Japanese Orthopaedic Association (mJOA) scale is the most common scale used to represent outcomes of degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM); however, it lacks consideration for neck pain scores and neglects the multidimensional aspect of recovery after surgery. OBJECTIVE: To use a global statistical approach that incorporates assessments of multiple outcomes to reassess the efficacy of riluzole in patients undergoing spinal surgery for DCM. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a secondary analysis of prespecified secondary end points within the Efficacy of Riluzole in Surgical Treatment for Cervical Spondylotic Myelopathy (CSM-PROTECT) trial, a multicenter, double-blind, phase 3 randomized clinical trial conducted from January 2012 to May 2017. Adult surgical patients with DCM with moderate to severe myelopathy (mJOA scale score of 8-14) were randomized to receive either riluzole or placebo. The present study was conducted from July to December 2023. INTERVENTION: Riluzole (50 mg twice daily) or placebo for a total of 6 weeks, including 2 weeks prior to surgery and 4 weeks following surgery. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome measure was a difference in clinical improvement from baseline to 1-year follow-up, assessed using a global statistical test (GST). The 36-Item Short Form Health Survey Physical Component Score (SF-36 PCS), arm and neck pain numeric rating scale (NRS) scores, American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) motor score, and Nurick grade were combined into a single summary statistic known as the global treatment effect (GTE). RESULTS: Overall, 290 patients (riluzole group, 141; placebo group, 149; mean [SD] age, 59 [10.1] years; 161 [56%] male) were included. Riluzole showed a significantly higher probability of global improvement compared with placebo at 1-year follow-up (GTE, 0.08; 95% CI, 0.00-0.16; P = .02). A similar favorable global response was seen at 35 days and 6 months (GTE for both, 0.07; 95% CI, -0.01 to 0.15; P = .04), although the results were not statistically significant. Riluzole-treated patients had at least a 54% likelihood of achieving better outcomes at 1 year compared with the placebo group. The ASIA motor score and neck and arm pain NRS combination at 1 year provided the best-fit parsimonious model for detecting a benefit of riluzole (GTE, 0.11; 95% CI, 0.02-0.16; P = .007). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this secondary analysis of the CSM-PROTECT trial using a global outcome technique, riluzole was associated with improved clinical outcomes in patients with DCM. The GST offered probability-based results capable of representing diverse outcome scales and should be considered in future studies assessing spine surgery outcomes.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease caused by the death of motor neurons. Riluzole is a benzothiazole derivative that blocks glutamatergic neurotransmission in the CNS, which is thought to exert neuroprotective effects. Riluzole was approved by the US FDA in 1995 as the first drug to treat ALS. Although riluzole is generally safe and well tolerated in clinical practice, its efficacy in ALS is modest, prolonging tracheostomy-free survival by only 2-3 months. In this article, we will first provide an overview of the ALS field, followed by a discussion of riluzole regarding its physical properties; pharmacology; clinical efficacy in ALS; safety and tolerability; and recommended administration.
