Objectives Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is an occupational disease mainly due to asbestos exposure. Effective therapies for MPM are lacking, making this tumour type a fatal disease. Materials and Methods In order to meet this need and in view of a future "drug repositioning" approach, here we screened five MPM (Mero-14, Mero-25, IST-Mes2, NCI-H28 and MSTO-211H) and one SV40-immortalized mesothelial cell line (MeT-5A) as a non-malignant model, with a library of 1170 FDA-approved drugs. Results Among several potential compounds, we found that fludarabine (F-araA) and, to a lesser extent, risedronic acid (RIS) were cytotoxic in MPM cells, in comparison to the non-malignant Met-5A cells. In particular, F-araA reduced the proliferation and the colony formation ability of the MPM malignant cells, in comparison to the non-malignant control cells, as demonstrated by proliferation and colony formation assays, in addition to measurement of the phospho-ERK/total-ERK ratio. We have shown that the response to F-araA was not dependent upon the expression of DCK and NT5E enzymes, nor upon their functional polymorphisms (rs11544786 and rs2295890, respectively). Conclusion This drug repositioning screening approach has identified that F-araA could be therapeutically active against MPM cells, in addition to other tumour types, by inhibiting STAT1 expression and nucleic acids synthesis. Further experiments are required to fully investigate this.
To date, hydroxyapatite (HAP) based monoliths were mainly fabricated by directly doping of HAP, which suffered from less effective coverage of HAP. Herein, a HAP surface-functionalized monolithic column (HAP@PDA@UF) has been prepared by in-situ biomineralization and applied as sorbent for selective in-tube solid phase microextraction of zoleronic acid and risedronic acid. A polydopamine coating was first generated on the surface of the parent urea-formaldehyde resin monolith; and then HAP microcrystals were further grew on the polydopamine coating to achieve this preparation. SEM, EDAX, FTIR, XPS and mercury intrusion method were utilized for the characterization of the HAP@PDA@UF monolith, and provided evidences of this successful preparation. The selective extraction mechanism of the HAP@PDA@UF monolith was investigated by the optimization of methanol percentage in the sampling solution, phosphate concentration in the eluent. Other crucial factors, including sampling and elution flow rate, and collection time span, were also optimized for the desired SPME performance. Under the optimal conditions, the proposed method showed low LODs of 0.1 mug/mL, satisfactory recoveries of 79.6%-92.5% with RSDs less than 2.7%, and good reproducibility with RSD less than 6.9%, which demonstrated the excellent application of the HAP@PDA@UF monolith, and its potential as a promising selective sorbent for bisphosphonates.
BACKGROUND: The objective of the study was to evaluate the effects of alendronic acid once weekly relative to risedronic acid once weekly on bone mineral density (BMD), markers of bone turnover and tolerability in the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. METHODS: This was a randomised, double-masked, double-dummy multicentre international study (75 centres in 27 countries in Europe, the Americas and Asia-Pacific). A total of 1303 women were screened and 936 with low bone density (T-score < or = -2.0 at the spine, hip trochanter, total hip or femoral neck) were randomised; 91% (n = 854) completed the study. Patients were randomised to treatment with either active alendronic acid 70 mg weekly (Fosamax) and placebo identical to risedronic acid weekly or active risedronic acid 35 mg weekly (Actonel) and placebo identical to alendronic acid weekly for 12 months. The primary efficacy endpoint was the percentage change from baseline in hip trochanter BMD at 12 months. Secondary endpoints included the percentage change from baseline in lumbar spine, total hip and femoral neck BMD; biochemical markers of bone turnover (including serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase [BSAP] and urinary type I collagen N-telopeptides [NTx]); and safety and tolerability as assessed by reporting of adverse experiences. RESULTS: Alendronic acid produced greater increases in BMD than did risedronic acid at 12 months at all sites measured. Mean percentage increases from baseline in hip trochanter BMD at month 12 were 3.56% and 2.71% in the alendronic acid and risedronic acid groups, respectively (treatment difference [95% CI]: 0.83% [0.22, 1.45; p = 0.008]). Mean percentage increases from baseline were greater with alendronic acid than risedronic acid at the lumbar spine, total hip and femoral neck BMD at month 12 (p = 0.002, p < 0.001, p = 0.039, respectively). Increases in BMD with alendronic acid compared with risedronic acid were also significantly greater at 6 months at the trochanter and total hip. There was a greater reduction in bone turnover with alendronic acid compared with risedronic acid: NTx decreased 58% with alendronic acid compared with 47% with risedronic acid at 12 months (p < 0.001); and BSAP decreased 45% with alendronic acid compared with 34% with risedronic acid at 12 months (p < 0.001). Overall tolerability and upper gastrointestinal tolerability were similar for both agents. CONCLUSIONS: Alendronic acid once weekly produced greater BMD increases at both hip and spine sites and greater reductions in bone turnover relative to risedronic acid once weekly. Both agents were well tolerated with no significant difference in upper gastrointestinal adverse experiences. Clinicians should consider these results when making treatment decisions for postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Male osteoporosis is an important public health issue and remains undertreated. We performed this meta-analysis to clarify the anti-fracture efficacy of risedronic acid in men. METHODS: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in men receiving risedronic acid or placebo published between 1980 and September 2008 were searched for in MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials. Studies with a follow-up of at least 12 months and providing the incidence of fractures were considered for inclusion in the review. Two independent reviewers assessed the methodological quality of the included studies and performed data extraction. Analysis of pooled data was carried out using Revman 4.2 software. RESULTS: Four RCTs met the inclusion criteria and permitted a pooled estimate of effectiveness. Relative risk with 95% confidence intervals for pooled effect under fixed effects model were: 0.31 (0.16, 0.60) for vertebral fractures and 0.40 (0.23, 0.70) for nonvertebral fractures, suggesting a 69% risk reduction of vertebral fractures and a 60% risk reduction of nonvertebral fracture with risedronic acid treatment in men. CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis show that risedronic acid treatment is associated with a reduced risk of fractures in men.
