BACKGROUND: Each year, clinical upper gastrointestinal events occur in 2 to 4 percent of patients who are taking nonselective nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). We assessed whether rofecoxib, a selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2, would be associated with a lower incidence of clinically important upper gastrointestinal events than is the nonselective NSAID naproxen among patients with rheumatoid arthritis. METHODS: We randomly assigned 8076 patients who were at least 50 years of age (or at least 40 years of age and receiving long-term glucocorticoid therapy) and who had rheumatoid arthritis to receive either 50 mg of rofecoxib daily or 500 mg of naproxen twice daily. The primary end point was confirmed clinical upper gastrointestinal events (gastroduodenal perforation or obstruction, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, and symptomatic gastroduodenal ulcers). RESULTS: Rofecoxib and naproxen had similar efficacy against rheumatoid arthritis. During a median follow-up of 9.0 months, 2.1 confirmed gastrointestinal events per 100 patient-years occurred with rofecoxib, as compared with 4.5 per 100 patient-years with naproxen (relative risk, 0.5; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.3 to 0.6; P<0.001). The respective rates of complicated confirmed events (perforation, obstruction, and severe upper gastrointestinal bleeding) were 0.6 per 100 patient-years and 1.4 per 100 patient-years (relative risk, 0.4; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.2 to 0.8; P=0.005). The incidence of myocardial infarction was lower among patients in the naproxen group than among those in the rofecoxib group (0.1 percent vs. 0.4 percent; relative risk, 0.2; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.1 to 0.7); the overall mortality rate and the rate of death from cardiovascular causes were similar in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, treatment with rofecoxib, a selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2, is associated with significantly fewer clinically important upper gastrointestinal events than treatment with naproxen, a nonselective inhibitor.
INTRODUCTION: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) prevent heterotopic ossification but gastrointestinal complaints are frequently. Selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibiting NSAID produce less gastrointestinal side effects. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A prospective two-stage study design for phase 2 clinical trials with 42 patients was used to determine if rofecoxib (a COX-2 inhibitor) 50 mg oral for 7 days prevents heterotopic ossification. A cemented primary THA was inserted for osteoarthroses. After 6 months heterotopic bone formation was assessed on AP radiographs using the Brooker classification. RESULTS: No heterotopic ossification was found in 81% of the patients, 19% of the patients had Brooker grade 1 ossification. CONCLUSION: Using a two-stage study design for phase 2 clinical trials, a 7-day treatment of a COX-2 inhibitor (rofecoxib) prevents effectively the formation of heterotopic ossification after cemented primary total hip arthroplasty.
Data suggest that cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitors are safer for the gastrointestinal tract than traditional nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Rofecoxib, a COX-2-specific NSAID, does not inhibit the COX-1 enzyme, thereby decreasing the potential for gastrointestinal-related adverse effects. Patients who are at an increased risk for NSAID-related gastrointestinal bleeding are therefore appropriate candidates for COX-2 inhibitors. Although the agents provide benefits for many patients, gastrointestinal-related side effects may occur, and caution should be practiced when prescribing COX-2 inhibitors. We report two patients who were admitted to the hospital with diagnoses of gastrointestinal bleeds while they were taking rofecoxib.
Owing to the involvement of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in carcinogenesis, COX-2-selective inhibitors are increasingly studied for their potential cytotoxic properties. Moreover, the incorporation of carboranes in structures of established anti-inflammatory drugs can improve the potency and metabolic stability of the inhibitors. Herein, we report the synthesis of carborane-containing derivatives of rofecoxib that display remarkable cytotoxic or cytostatic activity in the micromolar range with excellent selectivity for melanoma and colon cancer cell lines over normal cells. Furthermore, it was shown that the carborane-modified derivatives of rofecoxib showed different modes of action that were dependent on the cell type.
In a prospective study, nine patients with osteoid osteoma were treated with a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor (rofecoxib). Patient pain perception with no treatment, with conventional nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) treatment, and with rofecoxib therapy was compared using a visual analog scale. Tumor response was also monitored by radiographs, computed tomography, and bone scintigraphy. In all cases, pain diminished on administration of rofecoxiib in comparison to conventional NSAIDs (P < .05). Four patients underwent surgery whereas in the remaining five patients, bone scintigraphy showed reduced uptake after 6 months. In four patients who were retested at 12 months,scintigraphy values were normal. These four patients are currently asymptomatic and are not receiving any treatment, whereas the fifth patient is still receiving therapy.
Patients would be safer if drug companies disclosed adverse events before licensing
[reaction: see text] A newly developed synthesis of a NO-releasing prodrug of rofecoxib is described. The highly productive process consists of five chemical steps and produces prodrug 1 in an overall 64% yield from commercially available 3-phenyl-2-propyn-1-ol (4). The synthesis is highlighted by the carbometalation reaction of propargyl alcohol 4 to generate the tetrasubstituted olefin core, sulfone acid 2. Additionally, two alternate end-game strategies to prepare NO-COXIB 1 from this intermediate were explored and developed: (1) a convergent synthesis where a bromonitrate side chain is introduced in one step and (2) a two-step sequence that first installs the requisite six-carbon ester side chain followed by chemoselective nitration.
Rofecoxib 50 mg/day for 6 days provided better postoperative analgesia than nimesulide 200 mg/day in a randomised trial in patients (n = 130) undergoing surgical extraction of third molars. The superiority of rofecoxib over nimesulide was especially marked during the first 2-3 postoperative days and in patients with fully impacted molars. The drugs had similar effects on clinical signs of local postoperative inflammation. The effectiveness of rofecoxib in this study, plus considerations of the toxicity profile of nimesulide, support the conclusion that rofecoxib is preferable to nimesulide for relief of post-operative pain in patients undergoing surgical extraction of molars.
Several secondary causes are implicated in the etiology of idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Rofecoxib is a selective cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitor, now being increasingly used in place of nonselective nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). We report a case of intracranial hypertension in a 69-year-old man 3 weeks after the commencement of rofecoxib therapy with reversal of clinical findings on drug withdrawal.
A patient with acute renal failure associated with lactic acidosis as a result of concurrent treatment with metformin is described. Rofecoxib may have been a precipitating factor. The risk of renal failure with the use of traditional NSAIDs is well known. However, what is less well appreciated is the role that the COX 2 inhibitors may play in the development of renal failure which, when it occurs in a patient on metformin, can lead to a potentially disastrous outcome.
The development of aggregation-induced emission luminogens (AIEgens) has attracted increasing attention due to their potential applications in various areas in recent years. In this study, a facile conversion from aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ) to aggregation-induced emission (AIE) was achieved by an efficient regioisomerization strategy based on the rofecoxib scaffold. Two compounds, named PYR2 and PYR4, were identified as regioisomers of rofecoxib derivatives to show dramatically different fluorescent properties. Compound PYR2 with an ortho-substituted piperidine group showed typical AIE activity while compound PYR4 with a para-piperidine group exhibited typical ACQ behavior. Notably, compound PYR2 showed polymorphism with two forms of crystals. It was also endowed with reversible mechanochromic luminescence and acidochromic properties. The different fluorescent properties were elucidated by UV/Vis absorption spectroscopy, powder X-ray diffraction, differential scanning calorimetry, and thermogravimetric analyses. Its application as a security ink and in lipid droplets imaging have been demonstrated.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Rofecoxib, a selective cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor, has been associated with increased arterial thrombosis. It is unknown whether (COX-2) inhibition is associated with venous thromboembolism (VTE).We investigated, using a systematic review of the literature, the association between rofecoxib and venous thrombosis. METHODS: A search strategy was developed and implemented to identify all English language studies in which rofecoxib was compared with placebo, irrespective of the primary outcome of the study. Study methodology and results were reviewed in a standardized manner using RefMan software. Confidence intervals and risk difference were calculated using a Poisson distribution. RESULTS: The search strategy identified 1339 papers; 15 studies met our pre-specified inclusion criteria. The majority of trials were short in duration (~12 weeks). All studies met at least two of the three quality criteria. In 15,160 (9217 person years follow up) patients allocated to rofecoxib there were 8 VTEs reported, compared with 9 VTEs in 13147 (9092 person years) patients allocated to placebo (relative risk 0.87, 95% CI 0.29-2.56, p=NS). The estimated incidence of VTE was 86.8 per 100,000 (95% CI 37.5 -171.2) person years with rofecoxib, and 99.1 per 100,000 person years with placebo (95%CI 45.3 - 188). This difference is not statistically significant (p=0.78). CONCLUSIONS: Our findings are limited by the relatively small number of events, although, the contributing sample size of 28307 subjects (18309 person years) is reasonable. From our best available data outlined in this manuscript, there is no increase in the risk of VTE with rofecoxib use.
Crystal structures of a COX-II inhibitor, rofecoxib (Vioxx) were solved ab initio from X-ray powder diffraction pattern using both molecular packing analysis and direct space methods. The X-ray powder pattern was indexed into a tetragonal cell. Packing energies were generated and analyzed in eight most frequently found tetragonal space groups. The two space groups with the lowest total energy, P4(1)2(1)2 and P4(3)2(1)2, were used for direct space method with a Monte-Carlo/Simulated Annealing searching algorithm. Structural solutions obtained from direct space method were evaluated using molecular packing energy analysis. The structures solved ab initio from this work were compared to the single crystal structure deposited in the Cambridge Structural Database.
Angioedema is a recognised side effect of rofecoxib, a cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor. But death resulting from a haemorrhagic pulmonary oedema after its ingestion has not been recorded. The case of a 60 year old man who died from haemorrhagic pulmonary oedema in the presence of angioedema after the ingestion of two doses of 12.5 mg of rofecoxib is reported.
Rofecoxib, used for dysmenorrhea, caused a herpetiform fixed drug eruption predominantly involving the lips with classic clinical and histological findings in a red-brown lesion on the dorsal hand.
Development of new mechanochromic luminescent (MCL) materials from aggregation-induced emission luminogens (AIEgens) has attracted wide attention due to their potential application in multiple areas. However, rational design and crafting of new MCL materials from the simple AIEgens skeleton is still a big challenge because of the undesirable concentration quenching effect. In this study, we have constructed a new class of MCL materials by adding one phenyl as a new rotator and incorporating one pair of electron donor (D) and acceptor (A) into the system of rofecoxib skeleton. This strategy endowed the compounds (Y1-Y8) with tunable emission behavior and some of them with the AIE effect and reversible MCL behavior. These properties may be caused by the highly twisted conformation and loosely molecular packing modes, which were elucidated clearly by analyzing the data of single-crystal X-ray diffraction, powder X-ray diffraction, and differential scanning calorimetry. Further investigation revealed that Y7 displayed acidochromic property due to the protonation of the nitrogen atom. Moreover, Y7, as a typical compound, showed its potential applications in the area of anticounterfeiting, pH sensor, and LD-specific bioimaging.
Aseptic meningitis can be caused by viruses, drugs, and connective tissue disorders. The most common drugs causing it include antibiotics like trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), intravenous immunoglobulins, intrathecal agents, vaccines, and monoclonal antibodies. A patient who had aseptic meningitis from three different NSAIDs including rofecoxib is presented.
