Rosiglitazone is a ligand of peroxisome proliferation-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma). However, it exerts biological activities and therapeutic effects through both PPARgamma-dependent and independent mechanisms. In this study, we defined that rosiglitazone was also a ligand of retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRalpha) and displayed RXRalpha-dependent activities. We found that rosiglitazone directly bound to the ligand binding domain (LBD) of RXRalpha and induced RXRalpha/LBD tetramerization. Rosiglitazone inhibited the agonist-induced transcriptional activity of RXRalpha homodimers and heterodimers likely through inhibiting RXRalpha homo- and hetero-dimerization. In acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) NB4 cells, rosiglitazone inhibited cell proliferation and induced cell differentiation, resulting from inhibiting RXRalpha/PML-RARalpha complex formation and down-regulating PML-RARalpha. Together, our study identified RXRalpha as a novel target of rosiglitazone and RXRalpha mediating the anti-APL activity of rosiglitazone.
OBJECTIVE: Although many observational studies have shown an association between rosiglitazone and cardiovascular disease (CVD) or risk factors, controversy remains. We conducted a Mendelian randomized (MR) study to explore whether rosiglitazone is causally related to CVDs and risk factors. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with rosiglitazone at genome-wide significance were identified from a genome-wide association study of 337,159 European-ancestry individuals. Four treatments with rosiglitazone-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with a higher risk of CVDs were used as an instrumental variable (IV). Summary-level data for 7 CVDs and 7 risk factors were obtained from UK Biobank and consortia. RESULTS: We found no causal effects of rosiglitazone, either on CVDs or risk factors. The results were consistent in sensitivity analyses using Cochran's Q test, MR-PRESSO method, leave-one-out analysis and Mendelian randomization-Egger method (MR-Egger), and no directional pleiotropy was observed. Sensitivity analyses confirmed that rosiglitazone was not significantly associated with CVDs and risk factors. CONCLUSIONS: The findings from this MR study indicate no causal relationship between rosiglitazone and CVDs or risk factors. Hence, previous observational studies may have been biased.
OBJECTIVES: To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of rosiglitazone treatment on cardiovascular risk and mortality using multiple data sources and varying analytical approaches with three aims in mind: to clarify uncertainties about the cardiovascular risk of rosiglitazone; to determine whether different analytical approaches are likely to alter the conclusions of adverse event meta-analyses; and to inform efforts to promote clinical trial transparency and data sharing. DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. DATA SOURCES: GlaxoSmithKline's (GSK's) ClinicalStudyDataRequest.com for individual patient level data (IPD) and GSK's Study Register platforms, MEDLINE, PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled Trials, Scopus, and ClinicalTrials.gov from inception to January 2019 for summary level data. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR SELECTING STUDIES: Randomized, controlled, phase II-IV clinical trials that compared rosiglitazone with any control for at least 24 weeks in adults. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: For analyses of trials for which IPD were available, a composite outcome of acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, cardiovascular related death, and non-cardiovascular related death was examined. These four events were examined independently as secondary analyses. For analyses including trials for which IPD were not available, myocardial infarction and cardiovascular related death were examined, which were determined from summary level data. Multiple meta-analyses were conducted that accounted for trials with zero events in one or both arms with two different continuity corrections (0.5 constant and treatment arm) to calculate odds ratios and risk ratios with 95% confidence intervals. RESULTS: 33 eligible trials were identified from ClinicalStudyDataRequest.com for which IPD were available (21 156 patients). Additionally, 103 trials for which IPD were not available were included in the meta-analyses for myocardial infarction (23 683 patients), and 103 trials for which IPD were not available contributed to the meta-analyses for cardiovascular related death (22 772 patients). Among 29 trials for which IPD were available and that were included in previous meta-analyses using GSK's summary level data, more myocardial infarction events were identified by using IPD instead of summary level data for 26 trials, and fewer cardiovascular related deaths for five trials. When analyses were limited to trials for which IPD were available, and a constant continuity correction of 0.5 and a random effects model were used to account for trials with zero events in only one arm, patients treated with rosiglitazone had a 33% increased risk of a composite event compared with controls (odds ratio 1.33, 95% confidence interval 1.09 to 1.61; rosiglitazone population: 274 events among 11 837 patients; control population: 219 events among 9319 patients). The odds ratios for myocardial infarction, heart failure, cardiovascular related death, and non-cardiovascular related death were 1.17 (0.92 to 1.51), 1.54 (1.14 to 2.09), 1.15 (0.55 to 2.41), and 1.18 (0.60 to 2.30), respectively. For analyses including trials for which IPD were not available, odds ratios for myocardial infarction and cardiovascular related death were attenuated (1.09, 0.88 to 1.35, and 1.12, 0.72 to 1.74, respectively). Results were broadly consistent when analyses were repeated using trials with zero events across both arms and either of the two continuity corrections was used. CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that rosiglitazone is associated with an increased cardiovascular risk, especially for heart failure events. Although increased risk of myocardial infarction was observed across analyses, the strength of the evidence varied and effect estimates were attenuated when summary level data were used in addition to IPD. Because more myocardial infarctions and fewer cardiovascular related deaths were reported in the IPD than in the summary level data, sharing IPD might be necessary when performing meta-analyses focused on safety. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: OSF Home https://osf.io/4yvp2/.
PURPOSE: Our aim is to investigate the usefulness of metric indices in post-marketing safety evaluations by estimating number needed to harm (NNH) values for cardiovascular (CV) adverse outcomes for rosiglitazone and pioglitazone. METHODS: Reports from regulatory authorities (RAs) were consulted, and Medline searches were performed to identify studies assessing CV risks [all-cause death, CV death, myocardial infarction (MI), stroke, or congestive heart failure (CHF)] for thiazolidinediones. Meta-analyses were performed to pool evidence from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies (OS). NNHs [with 95% confidence intervals (CI)] per year were estimated for CV adverse events. RESULTS: Reports from RAs included two meta-analyses of short-term RCTs, two long-term RCTs (RECORD and PROACTIVE), and a systematic review of OS (n = 29). The Medline search identified six additional OS. Statistically significant NNH values were obtained for the following: (i) rosiglitazone versus control on MI and CHF in the meta-analysis of RCTs (NNH = 16; 95%CI = 10-255; and NNH = 7; 95%CI = 5-16, respectively) and meta-analysis of OS (NNH = 12; 95%CI = 9-20; and NNH = 5; 95%CI = 32-131, respectively) and on CHF in the RECORD (NNH = 6; 95%CI = 4-14); (ii) pioglitazone versus control on CHF (NNH = 11; 95%CI = 6, 403) in the meta-analysis of RCTs and PROACTIVE (NNH = 12; 95%CI = 8-43); and (iii) rosiglitazone versus pioglitazone on MI (NNH = 69; 95%CI = 32-379), stroke (NNH = 36; 95%CI = 20-225), CHF (NNH = 33; 95%CI = 19-47), and all-cause death (NNH = 63; 95%CI = 49-100) in the meta-analysis of OS. CONCLUSION: The NNH values suggested an increased CV risk with rosiglitazone versus pioglitazone across several sources of information. The inclusion of objective metrics in post-marketing drug's benefit-risk assessments could be of increased value and help RAs to make consistent decisions on drug safety.
Results of the recently published DREAM trial seemingly demonstrate that the PPAR-gamma agonist rosiglitazone is effective in the prevention of diabetes. However, a more detailed inspection of the trial shows that rosiglitazone is masking rather than preventing the progression to diabetes. This questionable effect was achieved at the price of unnecessarily treating approximately five subjects who would remain nondiabetic anyway for each case of "prevented" diabetes, with all the associated costs and risks. The trial also raises the unexpected possibility that rosiglitazone may substantially increase the risk of cardiovascular events, which would be particularly harmful in the high-risk patients with diabetes. This possibility is further supported by the results of several recent meta-analyses. In addition, these serious safety concerns should be carefully weighed against the weak evidence of benefit which, so far, is limited to laboratory endpoints. Therefore, rather than extending the use of rosiglitazone to the prevention of diabetes, the DREAM trial calls in question the safety of this drug as such in any patient and casts some doubt upon the whole class of PPAR-gamma agonists. With respect to its wide use in clinical practice, the potential risks of rosiglitazone warrant careful investigation and, in the meantime, this drug should be used with caution.
Treatment with PPARgamma agonists in vivo improves human adipocyte metabolism, but the cellular mechanisms and possible depot differences in responsiveness to their effects are poorly understood. To examine the ex vivo metabolic effects of rosiglitazone (Rosi), we cultured explants of human visceral (omental) and abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissues for 7 days. Rosi increased mRNA levels of transcriptional regulators of brite/beige adipocytes (PGC1alpha, PRDM16), triglyceride synthesis (GPAT3, DGAT1), and lipolysis (ATGL) similarly in adipose tissues from both depots. In parallel, Rosi increased key modulators of FA oxidation (UCP1, FABP3, PLIN5 protein), rates of FA oxidation, and protein levels of electron transport complexes, suggesting an enhanced respiratory capacity as confirmed in newly differentiated adipocytes. Rosi led to the formation of small lipid droplets (SLDs) around the adipocyte central lipid droplet; each SLD was decorated with redistributed mitochondria that colocalized with PLIN5. SLD maintenance required lipolysis and FA reesterification. Rosi thus coordinated a structural and metabolic remodeling in adipocytes from both visceral and subcutaneous depots that enhanced oxidative capacity. Selective targeting of these cellular mechanisms to improve adipocyte FA handling may provide a new approach to treat metabolic complications of obesity and diabetes.
Clinical studies revealed detrimental skeletal and vascular effects of the insulin sensitizer rosiglitazone. We have shown earlier that rosiglitazone accelerates osteoblast differentiation from human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) at the expense of increased oxidative stress and cell death. In calcifying human vascular cells, rosiglitazone stimulates pathological mineralization, an effect diminished by the antioxidant resveratrol. Here, we aimed to elucidate transcriptional networks underlying the rosiglitazone-enhanced mineralization phenotype. We performed genome-wide transcriptional profiling of osteogenic hMSCs treated with rosiglitazone for short-term periods of 1 up to 48 h during the first two days of differentiation, a phase that we show is sufficient for rosiglitazone stimulation of mineralization. Microarray-based mRNA expression analysis revealed 190 probes that were differently expressed in at least one condition compared to vehicle-treated control. This rosiglitazone gene signature contained well-known primary PPAR targets and was also endogenously regulated during osteogenic hMSC differentiation and osteoblast-like differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) into calcifying vascular cells (CVCs). Comparative analysis revealed rosiglitazone targets that were commonly enriched in osteoblasts and CVCs or specifically enriched in either osteoblasts or CVCs. Finally, we compared expression patterns of CVC-specific genes with patient expression data from carotid plaque versus intact adjacent tissue, and identified five rosiglitazone targets to be differentially regulated in CVCs and carotid plaque but not osteoblasts when compared to their non-mineralizing counterparts. These targets, i.e., PDK4, SDC4, SPRY4, TCF4 and DACT1, may specifically control extracellular matrix mineralization in vascular cells, and hence provide target candidates for further investigations to improve vascular health.
AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The Diabetes Reduction Assessment with Ramipril and Rosiglitazone Medication (DREAM) trial reported that 3 years of therapy with rosiglitazone reduced the primary outcome of diabetes or death by 60%. Here we investigated whether an effect on diabetes prevention persists more than 1.5 years after therapy has been discontinued. METHODS: The DREAM On passive follow-up study was conducted at 49 of the 191 DREAM sites. Consenting participants were invited to have a repeat OGTT 1-2 years after active therapy ended. A diagnosis of diabetes at that time was based on either a fasting or 2 h plasma glucose level of >/=7.0 mmol/l or >/=11.1 mmol/l, respectively, or a confirmed diagnosis by a non-study physician. Regression to normoglycaemia was defined as a fasting and 2 h plasma glucose level of <6.1 mmol/l and <7.8 mmol/l, respectively. RESULTS: After a median of 1.6 years after the end of the trial and 4.3 years after randomisation, rosiglitazone participants had a 39% lower incidence of the primary outcome (hazard ratio [HR] 0.61, 95% CI 0.53-0.70; p < 0.0001) and 17% more regression to normoglycaemia (95% CI 1.01-1.34; p = 0.034). When the analysis was restricted to the passive follow-up period, a similar incidence of both the primary outcome and regression was observed in people from both treatment groups (HR 1.00, 95% CI 0.81-1.24 and HR 1.14, 95% CI 0.97-1.32, respectively). Similar effects were noted when new diabetes was analysed separately from death. Ramipril did not have any significant long-term effect. CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Time-limited exposure to rosiglitazone reduces the longer term incidence of diabetes by delaying but not reversing the underlying disease process.
OBJECTIVE: ADOPT (A Diabetes Outcome Progression Trial) demonstrated that initial monotherapy with rosiglitazone provided superior durability of glycemic control compared with metformin and glyburide in patients with recently diagnosed type 2 diabetes. Herein, we examine measures of beta-cell function and insulin sensitivity from an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) over a 4-year period among the three treatments. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Recently diagnosed, drug-naive patients with type 2 diabetes (4,360 total) were treated for a median of 4.0 years with rosiglitazone, metformin, or glyburide and were examined with periodic metabolic testing using an OGTT. RESULTS: Measures of beta-cell function and insulin sensitivity from an OGTT showed more favorable changes over time with rosiglitazone versus metformin or glyburide. Persistent improvements were seen in those who completed 4 years of monotherapy and marked deterioration of beta-cell function in those who failed to maintain adequate glucose control with initial monotherapy. CONCLUSIONS: The favorable combined changes in beta-cell function and insulin sensitivity over time with rosiglitazone appear to be responsible for its superior glycemic durability over metformin and glyburide as initial monotherapy in type 2 diabetes.
AIMS: We aimed to determine the effect of 1-year treatment with the insulin sensitizer peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-gamma agonist rosiglitazone on exercise capacity and blood pressure (BP) response to exercise in men with coronary artery disease (CAD) and type 2 diabetes (T2D). MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 116 men (age, 64 +/- 7 years; body mass index, 30.0 +/- 4.4 kg/m(2) ) with CAD and T2D were randomized to receive rosiglitazone or placebo for 1 year. Exercise capacity (VO(2peak) ) and BP response to exercise were assessed with a maximal treadmill test, prior to the intervention and at 1-year follow-up. Exercise-induced hypertension (EIH) was defined as maximal systolic BP >/= 220 mm Hg and/or diastolic BP >/= 100 mm Hg. RESULTS: PPAR-gamma agonist-treated patients showed improvements in fasting glucose, HbA1c and insulin sensitivity (Homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance [HOMA-IR]) (all P < .05). Resting BPs, maximal exercise diastolic BP and resting rate-pressure product (RPP) were all reduced in the PPAR-gamma agonist group (P < .05). Maximal exercise duration was unchanged. T2D patients who displayed the greatest improvement in insulin sensitivity (HOMA-IR) under PPAR-gamma agonist treatment experienced a greater reduction in exercise BP and RPP (P < .05). The proportion of men with EIH decreased in the PPAR-gamma agonist group during follow-up (39.00% +/- 0.06% vs 21.00% +/- 0.05%). In the subgroup with EIH that was treated with a PPAR-gamma agonist, resting and exercise diastolic BP, as well as resting RPP, were all reduced at 1-year follow-up (P < .05). CONCLUSIONS: The insulin sensitizer rosiglitazone has a beneficial effect on resting and BP response to exercise in men with CAD and T2D, especially in those with an exaggerated BP response to exercise.
