BACKGROUND: In 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first generic maintenance inhaler for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The inhaler, Wixela Inhub (fluticasone-salmeterol; Viatris), is a substitutable version of the dry powder inhaler Advair Diskus (fluticasone-salmeterol; GlaxoSmithKline). When approving complex generic products like inhalers, the FDA applies a special "weight-of-evidence" approach. In this case, manufacturers were required to perform a randomized controlled trial in patients with asthma but not COPD, although the product received approval for both indications. OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness and safety of generic (Wixela Inhub) and brand-name (Advair Diskus) fluticasone-salmeterol among patients with COPD treated in routine care. DESIGN: A 1:1 propensity score-matched cohort study. SETTING: A large, longitudinal health care database. PATIENTS: Adults older than 40 years with a diagnosis of COPD. MEASUREMENTS: Incidence of first moderate or severe COPD exacerbation (effectiveness outcome) and incidence of first pneumonia hospitalization (safety outcome) in the 365 days after cohort entry. RESULTS: Among 45 369 patients (27 305 Advair Diskus users and 18 064 Wixela Inhub users), 10 012 matched pairs were identified for the primary analysis. Compared with Advair Diskus use, Wixela Inhub use was associated with a nearly identical incidence of first moderate or severe COPD exacerbation (hazard ratio [HR], 0.97 [95% CI, 0.90 to 1.04]) and first pneumonia hospitalization (HR, 0.99 [CI, 0.86 to 1.15]). LIMITATIONS: Follow-up times were short, reflecting real-world clinical practice. The possibility of residual confounding cannot be completely excluded. CONCLUSION: Use of generic and brand-name fluticasone-salmeterol was associated with similar outcomes among patients with COPD treated in routine practice. PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
A convenient and efficient method for the cleavage of 1,3-oxazolidin-5-ones and 1,3-oxazolidin-2-ones utilising potassium trimethylsilanolate in tetrahydrofuran is described. The benzyloxycarbonyl-protecting group is readily removed under the reaction conditions, whereas the N-benzoyl group is stable. A synthesis of (R)-salmeterol exploiting the 2-oxazolidinone ring as a protecting group for the ethanolamine moiety is also described.
BACKGROUND: Fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate (FP/SAL) is an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA) combination, indicated for the regular treatment of children (aged >4 years) with asthma that is inadequately controlled with ICS monotherapy plus as-needed short-acting beta(2)-agonists, or already adequately controlled with ICS/LABA. OBJECTIVE: Compared with the adult population, fewer clinical studies have investigated the efficacy of FP/SAL in paediatric patients with moderate and moderate-to-severe asthma. In this review, we synthesise the available evidence for the efficacy and safety of FP/SAL in the paediatric population, compared with other available therapies indicated for asthma in children. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: A literature review identified randomised controlled trials and observational studies of FP/SAL in the paediatric population with moderate-to-severe asthma. SOURCES OF EVIDENCE: The Medline database was searched using PubMed (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), with no publication date restrictions. Search strategies were developed and refined by authors. CHARTING METHODS: Selected articles were screened for clinical outcome data (exacerbation reduction, nocturnal awakenings, lung function, symptom control, rescue medication use and safety) and a table of key parameters developed. RESULTS: Improvements in asthma outcomes with FP/SAL include reduced risk of asthma-related emergency department visits and hospitalisations, protection against exercise-induced asthma and improvements in measures of lung function. Compared with FP monotherapy, greater improvements in measures of lung function and asthma control are reported. In addition, reduced incidence of exacerbations, hospitalisations and rescue medication use is observed with FP/SAL compared with ICS and leukotriene receptor antagonist therapy. Furthermore, FP/SAL therapy can reduce exposure to both inhaled and oral corticosteroids. CONCLUSIONS: FP/SAL is a reliable treatment option in patients not achieving control with ICS monotherapy or a different ICS/LABA combination. Evidence shows that FP/SAL is well tolerated and has a similar safety profile to FP monotherapy. Thus, FP/SAL provides an effective option for the management of moderate-to-severe asthma in the paediatric population.
BACKGROUND: Despite the recommendation of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) plus long-acting beta 2-agonist (LABA) and leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA) or ICS/LTRA as stepwise approaches in asthmatic children, there is a lack of published systematic review comparing the efficacy and safety of the two therapies in children and adolescents aged 4 to 18 years. This study aimed to compare the safety and efficacy of salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC) vs. montelukast (MON), or combination of montelukast and fluticasone (MFC) in children and adolescents aged 4 to 18 years with bronchial asthma. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted in MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, China BioMedical Literature Database, Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure, VIP Database for Chinese Technical Periodical, and Wanfang for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) published from inception to May 24, 2021. Interventions are as follows: SFC vs. MON, or combination of MFC, with no limitation of dosage or duration. Primary and secondary outcome measures were as follows: the primary outcome of interest was the risk of asthma exacerbation. Secondary outcomes included risk of hospitalization, pulmonary function, asthma control level, quality of life, and adverse events (AEs). A random-effects (I2 >/= 50%) or fixed-effects model (I2 < 50%) was used to calculate pooled effect estimates, comparing the outcomes between the intervention and control groups where feasible. RESULTS: Of the 1006 articles identified, 21 studies met the inclusion criteria with 2643 individuals; two were at low risk of bias. As no primary outcomes were similar after an identical treatment duration in the included studies, meta-analysis could not be performed. However, more studies favored SFC, instead of MON, owing to a lower risk of asthma exacerbation in the SFC group. As for secondary outcome, SFC showed a significant improvement of peak expiratory flow (PEF)%pred after 4 weeks compared with MFC (mean difference [MD]: 5.45; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.57-9.34; I2 = 95%; P = 0.006). As for asthma control level, SFC also showed a higher full-controlled level (risk ratio [RR]: 1.51; 95% CI: 1.24-1.85; I2 = 0; P < 0.001) and higher childhood asthma control test score after 4 weeks of treatment (MD: 2.30; 95% CI: 1.39-3.21; I2 = 72%; P < 0.001) compared with MFC. CONCLUSIONS: SFC may be more effective than MFC for the treatment of asthma in children and adolescents, especially in improving asthma control level. However, there is insufficient evidence to make firm conclusive statements on the use of SFC or MON in children and adolescents aged 4 to 18 years with asthma. Further research is needed, particularly a combination of good-quality long-term prospective studies and well-designed RCTs. PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42019133156.
Background: A generic combination of fluticasone propionate and salmeterol xinafoate inhalation powder in a premetered, multidose, nonreusable inhaler was recently approved. Objective: To assess the performance of the generic device. Methods: Findings from three studies with regard to device usability, function, and robustness were reviewed. Results: In a study to assess device function in patients and healthy volunteers, the generic device was successfully used by patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who were either dry powder inhaler users or dry powder inhaler-naive, even though they were not trained beyond being provided the instructions for use. In a study to measure inhaled flow rates generated by patients and healthy volunteers, the generic device consistently simulated the delivery of a full dose of drug, even to patients with severe respiratory disease and reduced inspiratory flow rates. Although the generic device had a slightly higher airflow resistance, this study demonstrated that this difference did not result in any clinically meaningful differences in terms of drug delivery. Pressure drop, a key parameter that drives the fluidization and aerosolization of the powder dose, was found to be comparable between the devices. In an open-label study, the generic device met all U.S. Food and Drug Administration specifications for device robustness after 21.5 days of twice-daily dosing via oral inhalation among 111 participants with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. All inhalers tested demonstrated conformity with a pharmacopeia with respect to key quality parameters (assay, delivered dose uniformity, aerodynamic size distribution). There was no evidence of chemical degradation of the active ingredients, nor of microbial or water ingress into the powder, as a result of inhaler use.
Advair Diskus is an essential treatment for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It is a dry powder inhaler with a combination of fluticasone propionate (FP) and salmeterol xinafoate (SX). However, the pharmacokinetics (PK) batch-to-batch variability of the reference-listed drug (RLD) hindered its generic product development. This work developed the PK models for inhaled FP and SX that could represent potential batch variability. Two batches each of the reference and the test product (R(1), R(2), T(1), T(2)) of Advair Diskus (100 mug FP/50 mug SX inhalation) were administered to 60 healthy subjects in a 4-period, 4-sequence crossover study. The failure of the bioequivalence (BE) between R(1) and R(2) confirmed the high between-batch variability of the RLD. Non-linear mixed effect modeling was used to estimate the population mean PK parameters for each batch. For FP, a 2-compartment model with a sequential dual zero-order absorption best described the PK profile. For SX, a 2-compartment model with a first-order absorption model best fit the data. Both models were able to capture the plasma concentration, the maximum concentration, and the total exposure (AUC(inf)) adequately for each batch, which could be used to simulate the BE study in the future. In vitro properties were also measured for each batch, and the batch with a higher fraction of the fine particle (diameter < 1 microm, < 2 microm) had a higher AUC(inf). This positive correlation for both FP and SX could potentially assist the batch selection for the PK BE study.
Among Chinese populations worldwide, Chinese herbal medicines (CHMs) are often used as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy in managing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, the relative performance among different CHM is unknown.The aim of this study was to evaluate comparative effectiveness of different CHM when used with salmeterol and fluticasone propionate (SFP), compared with SFP alone.This study is a systematic review of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with network meta-analyses (NMAs).Eight electronic databases were searched. Data from RCTs were extracted for random effect pairwise meta-analyses. Pooled relative risk (RR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) was used to quantify the impact of CHM and SFP on forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scoring, and 6-Minute Walk Test (6MWT). NMA was used to explore the most effective CHM when used with SFP.Eleven RCTs (n = 925) assessing 11 different CHM were included. Result from pairwise meta-analyses indicated favorable, clinically relevant benefit of CHM and SFP on FEV1 [7 studies, pooled weighted mean difference (WMD) = 0.20 L, 95% CI: 0.06-0.34 L], SGRQ scoring (5 studies, pooled WMD = -4.99, 95% CI: -7.73 to -2.24), and 6MWT (3 studies, pooled WMD = 32.84 m, 95% CI: 18.26-47.42). Results from NMA showed no differences on the comparative effectiveness among CHM formulations for improving FEV1. For SGRQ, NMA suggested that Runfeijianpibushen decoction and Renshenbufei pills performed best. Use of CHM on top of SFP can provide clinically relevant benefit for COPD patients on FEV1 and SGRQ. Additional use of Runfeijianpibushen decoction and Renshenbufei pills showed better effect on improving SGRQ.Use of CHM and SFP may provide clinically relevant benefit for COPD patients on FEV1, SGRQ, and 6MWT. Use of different CHM formulae included in this NMA showed similar effect for increasing FEV1, while the additional use of Runfeijianpibushen formula and Renshenbufei Pills showed better effect on improving SGRQ. Well conducted, adequately powered trials are needed to confirm their effectiveness in the future.
BACKGROUND: As-needed low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)-formoterol reliever is recommended in patients with asthma prescribed maintenance ICS-formoterol. Clinicians often ask whether ICS-formoterol reliever can be used with other maintenance ICS-long-acting beta(2)-agonists. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety and effectiveness of as-needed formoterol in patients taking maintenance ICS-formoterol or ICS-salmeterol from the RELIEF study. METHODS: RELIEF (SD-037-0699) was a 6-month, open-label study that randomized 18,124 patients with asthma to as-needed formoterol 4.5 mug or salbutamol 200 mug on top of maintenance therapy. This post hoc analysis included patients on maintenance ICS-formoterol or ICS-salmeterol (n = 5436). The primary safety outcome was a composite of serious adverse events (SAEs) and/or adverse events leading to discontinuation (DAEs); the primary effectiveness outcome was time-to-first exacerbation. RESULTS: For both maintenance groups and both relievers, similar numbers of patients had >/=1 SAE and/or DAE. In patients taking maintenance ICS-salmeterol, but not ICS-formoterol, significantly more non-asthma-related and nonserious DAEs occurred with as-needed formoterol versus as-needed salbutamol (P = .0066 and P = .0034, respectively). In patients taking maintenance ICS-formoterol, there was a significantly lower risk in time-to-first exacerbation with as-needed formoterol versus as-needed salbutamol (hazard ratio [HR]: 0.82, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.70, 0.95; P = .007). In patients taking ICS-salmeterol maintenance, time-to-first exacerbation was not significantly different between treatment arms (HR: 0.95, 95% CI: 0.84, 1.06; P = .35). CONCLUSIONS: As-needed formoterol significantly reduced exacerbation risk compared with as-needed salbutamol when added to maintenance ICS-formoterol, but not to maintenance ICS-salmeterol. More DAEs were seen with ICS-salmeterol maintenance therapy plus as-needed formoterol. Further research is needed to assess whether this is relevant to as-needed combination ICS-formoterol.
Salmeterol and fluticasone are included in the Prohibited List annually issued by the World Anti-Doping Agency. While for other permitted beta-2 agonists a threshold has been established, above which any finding constitutes an Adverse Analytical Finding, this is not the case with salmeterol. The salmeterol metabolite, alpha-hydroxysalmeterol, has been described as a potentially more suitable biomarker for the misuse of inhaled salmeterol. In this study, a new and rapid UHPLC-QTOF-MS method was developed and validated for the simultaneous quantification of salmeterol, alpha-hydroxysalmeterol and fluticasone in human urine and plasma, which can be used for doping control. The analytes of interest were extracted by means of solid phase extraction and were separated on a Zorbax Eclipse Plus C(18) column. Detection was performed in a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer equipped with an electrospray ionization source, in positive mode for the detection of salmeterol and its metabolite and in negative mode for the detection of fluticasone. Method was validated over a linear range from 0.10 to 2.00 ng/ml for salmeterol and fluticasone, and from 1.00 to 20.0 ng/ml for alpha-hydroxysalmeterol, in urine, whereas in plasma, the linear range was from 0.025 to 0.500 ng/ml for salmeterol and fluticasone, respectively.
As of 2020, use of beta(2) -agonist salmeterol is restricted by the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) and is only permitted by inhalation at therapeutic doses not exceeding 200 mug in 24 h. In contrast to beta(2) -agonists salbutamol and formoterol, WADA has not established a urine threshold for salmeterol despite its muscle hypertrophic actions observed in animals. Herein, we investigated plasma (0-4 h) and urine (0-24 h) concentrations (by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry [UHPLC-MS/MS]) of salmeterol and alpha-hydroxysalmeterol after dry powder inhalation at supratherapeutic (400 mug) and high therapeutic (200 mug) doses, and after seven consecutive days of therapeutic inhalation (200 mug x day(-1) ) in 11 healthy endurance-trained men. During each trial, participants inhaled salmeterol before 1(1/2) h moderate-intensity cycling. Mean +/- SD maximum urine concentrations of salmeterol unadjusted for specific gravity reached 4.0 +/- 1.6, 2.1 +/- 1.5, and 2.2 +/- 1.1 ng x ml(-1) for 400 mug, 200 mug, and seven consecutive days of 200 mug, respectively, with corresponding maximum urine concentrations of alpha-hydroxysalmeterol being 11.6 +/- 6.1, 5.7 +/- 4.6, and 6.5 +/- 2.6 ng x ml(-1) . Within the relevant window for doping control (first 6 h post-inhalation), the present data (119 samples), along with 64 biobank urine samples, showed that a combined salmeterol and alpha-hydroxysalmeterol urine threshold with equal cut-offs of 3.3 ng x ml(-1) was superior to a salmeterol-only threshold to discriminate therapeutic (200 mug) from supratherapeutic use (400 mug) with a sensitivity of 24% with 0% false positives when applying the WADA technical document (TD2019DL.v2) method of specific gravity adjustment. Thus, a combination of urine salmeterol and alpha-hydroxysalmeterol concentrations may be suitable for discriminating between therapeutic and supratherapeutic prohibited inhalation of salmeterol.
BACKGROUND: beta(2)-Agonists have previously been shown to be effective inhibitors of mediator release from airway mucosal mast cells. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of intranasal salmeterol and fluticasone propionate alone and in combination on the response to nasal adenosine monophosphate (AMP) challenge to assess mast cell activation. METHODS: Twenty-three patients with persistent allergic rhinitis completed a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 4-way crossover trial. They received once daily treatment with placebo, salmeterol, 50 mug, fluticasone propionate, 500 mug, or fluticasone propionate and salmeterol combination, 500/50 mug, delivered via an antistatic spacer with nasal adapter for 1 week each, with trough measurements being made 12 hours after the first and last dose. The primary outcome was the maximum percentage decrease in peak nasal inspiratory flow after nasal AMP challenge. RESULTS: For the primary outcome there was significant protection after single and long-term dosing with fluticasone alone and fluticasone-salmeterol combination, whereas salmeterol alone only afforded protection after the first dose. Fluticasone-salmeterol combination and fluticasone but not salmeterol conferred significant chronic dosing effects on secondary outcomes of nasal symptoms and disease-specific quality of life. There was no potentiation of the response to fluticasone by salmeterol on any outcomes when given in combination. CONCLUSION: Chronic dosing with fluticasone but not salmeterol confers anti-inflammatory activity against nasal AMP challenge, but there was no potentiation of fluticasone when given in combination with salmeterol. Thus, salmeterol may not be an effective treatment for use in allergic rhinitis. TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01388595.
BACKGROUND: Asthma is characterised by chronic inflammation of the airways and recurrent exacerbations with wheezing, chest tightness, and cough. Treatment with inhaled steroids and bronchodilators can result in good control of symptoms, prevention of further morbidity, and improved quality of life. However, an increase in serious adverse events with the use of both regular formoterol and regular salmeterol (long-acting beta(2)-agonists) compared with placebo for chronic asthma has been demonstrated in previous Cochrane Reviews. This increase was statistically significant in trials that did not randomise participants to an inhaled corticosteroid, but not when formoterol or salmeterol was combined with an inhaled corticosteroid. The confidence intervals were found to be too wide to ensure that the addition of an inhaled corticosteroid renders regular long-acting beta(2)-agonists completely safe; few participants and insufficient serious adverse events in these trials precluded a definitive decision about the safety of combination treatments. OBJECTIVES: To assess risks of mortality and non-fatal serious adverse events in trials that have randomised patients with chronic asthma to regular formoterol and an inhaled corticosteroid versus regular salmeterol and an inhaled corticosteroid. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Register of Trials, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, and two trial registries to identify reports of randomised trials for inclusion. We checked manufacturers' websites and clinical trial registers for unpublished trial data, as well as Food and Drug Administration (FDA) submissions in relation to formoterol and salmeterol. The date of the most recent search was  24 February 2021. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included controlled clinical trials with a parallel design, recruiting patients of any age and severity of asthma, if they randomised patients to treatment with regular formoterol versus regular salmeterol (each with a randomised inhaled corticosteroid) and were of at least 12 weeks' duration. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently selected trials for inclusion in the review, extracted outcome data from published papers and trial registries, and applied GRADE rating for the results. We sought unpublished data on mortality and serious adverse events from study sponsors and authors. The primary outcomes were all cause mortality and non-fatal serious adverse events. We chose not to calculate an average result from all the formulations of formoterol and inhaled steroid, as the doses and delivery devices are too diverse to assume a single class effect. MAIN RESULTS: Twenty-one studies in 11,572 adults and adolescents and two studies in 723 children met the eligibility criteria of the review. No data were available for two studies; therefore these were not included in the analysis. Among adult and adolescent studies, seven compared formoterol and budesonide to salmeterol and fluticasone (N = 7764), six compared formoterol and beclomethasone to salmeterol and fluticasone (N = 1923), two compared formoterol and mometasone to salmeterol and fluticasone (N = 1126), two compared formoterol and fluticasone to salmeterol and fluticasone (N = 790), and one compared formoterol and budesonide to salmeterol and budesonide (N = 229). In total, five deaths were reported among adults, none of which was thought to be related to asthma. The certainty of evidence for all-cause mortality was low, as there were not enough deaths to permit any precise conclusions regarding the risk of mortality on combination formoterol versus combination salmeterol. In all, 201 adults reported non-fatal serious adverse events. In studies comparing formoterol and budesonide to salmeterol and fluticasone, there were 77 in the formoterol arm and 68 in the salmeterol arm (Peto odds ratio (OR) 1.14, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.82 to 1.59; 5935 participants, 7 studies; moderate-certainty evidence). In the formoterol and beclomethasone studies, there were 12 adults in the formoterol arm and 13 in the salmeterol arm with events (Peto OR 0.94, 95% CI 0.43 to 2.08; 1941 participants, 6 studies; moderate-certainty evidence). In the formoterol and mometasone studies, there were 18 in the formoterol arm and 11 in the salmeterol arm (Peto OR 1.02, 95% CI 0.47 to 2.20; 1126 participants, 2 studies; moderate-certainty evidence). One adult in the formoterol and fluticasone studies in the salmeterol arm experienced an event (Peto OR 0.05, 95% CI 0.00 to 3.10; 293 participants, 2 studies; low-certainty evidence). Another adult in the formoterol and budesonide compared to salmeterol and budesonide study in the formoterol arm had an event (Peto OR 7.45, 95% CI 0.15 to 375.68; 229 participants, 1 study; low-certainty evidence). Only 46 adults were reported to have experienced asthma-related serious adverse events. The certainty of the evidence was low to very low due to the small number of events and the absence of independent assessment of causation. The two studies in children compared formoterol and fluticasone to salmeterol and fluticasone. No deaths and no asthma-related serious adverse events were reported in these studies. Four all-cause serious adverse events were reported: three in the formoterol arm, and one in the salmeterol arm (Peto OR 2.72, 95% CI 0.38 to 19.46; 548 participants, 2 studies; low-certainty evidence). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Overall, for both adults and children, evidence is insufficient to show whether regular formoterol in combination with budesonide, beclomethasone, fluticasone, or mometasone has a different safety profile from salmeterol in combination with fluticasone or budesonide. Five deaths of any cause were reported across all studies and no deaths from asthma; this information is insufficient to permit any firm conclusions about the relative risks of mortality on combination formoterol in comparison to combination salmeterol inhalers. Evidence on all-cause non-fatal serious adverse events indicates that there is probably little to no difference between formoterol/budesonide and salmeterol/fluticasone inhalers. However events for the other formoterol combination inhalers were too few to allow conclusions. Only 46 non-fatal serious adverse events were thought to be asthma related; this small number in addition to the absence of independent outcome assessment means that we have very low confidence for this outcome. We found no evidence of safety issues that would affect the choice between salmeterol and formoterol combination inhalers used for regular maintenance therapy by adults and children with asthma.
BACKGROUND: Asthma is a chronic respiratory disease that affects millions of children worldwide and can impair their quality of life and development. Inhaled glucocorticoids are the mainstay of asthma treatment, but some children require step-up therapy with additional drugs to achieve symptom control. Fluticasone propionate and salmeterol (FSC) has been shown to reduce asthma exacerbations and improve lung function in adults. However, the evidence for its efficacy and safety in children is limited. OBJECTIVE: This study aims to provide a comprehensive basis for treatment selection by summarizing existing clinical randomized controlled trials (RCTs) on the efficacy of FSC compared to fluticasone propionate (FP) monotherapy in children with asthma who require step-up treatment. METHODS: Five online databases and three clinical trial registration platforms were systematically searched. The effect size and corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) were calculated based on the heterogeneity among the included studies. RESULTS: Twelve RCTs were identified and a total of 9, 859 patients were involved. The results of the meta-analysis revealed that the use of FSC was associated with a greater reduction in the incidence of asthma exacerbations than FP alone when the dose of FP was the same or when the duration of treatment exceeded 12 weeks. In addition, FSC resulted in a greater proportion of time with asthma-free and without the use of albuterol compared to FP alone when the duration of treatment exceeded 12 weeks. No significant differences were observed between FSC and FP alone in the incidence of drug-related adverse events and other adverse events. CONCLUSION: Both FSC and FP alone are viable options for the initial selection of step-up treatment in asthmatic children. While, FSC treatment demonstrates a greater likelihood of reducing asthma exacerbations which is particularly important for reducing the personnel, social and economic burden in children requiring step-up asthma treatment.
BACKGROUND: Clinical information on 24-h spirometric efficacy of combining tiotropium and salmeterol compared to single-agent therapy is lacking in patients with COPD. METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, four-way crossover study of 6-week treatment periods comparing combination therapy of tiotropium 18 microg plus qd or bid salmeterol 50 microg versus single-agent therapy. Serial 24-h spirometry (FEV(1), FVC), effects on dyspnea (TDI focal score) and rescue salbutamol use were evaluated in 95 patients. RESULTS: Tiotropium plus qd salmeterol was superior to tiotropium or salmeterol alone in average FEV(1) (0-24h) by 72 mL and 97 mL (p<0.0001), respectively. Compared to this qd regimen, combination therapy including bid salmeterol provided comparable daytime (0-12h: 12 mL, p=0.38) bronchodilator effects, but significantly more bronchodilation during the night-time (12-24h: 73 mL, p<0.0001). Clinically relevant improvements in TDI focal score were achieved with bronchodilator combinations including salmeterol qd or bid (2.56 and 2.71; p<0.005 versus components). Symptom benefit of combination therapies was also reflected in less need for reliever medication. All treatments were well tolerated. CONCLUSION: Compared to single-agent therapy, combination therapy of tiotropium plus salmeterol in COPD provided clinically meaningful improvements in airflow obstruction and dyspnea as well as a reduction in reliever medication.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the pharmacological interaction of salmeterol and salbutamol and to derive an estimate of dose equivalence of salmeterol for airway and systemic effects in patients with asthma. DESIGN: Randomised double blind crossover study. SUBJECTS: 12 patients with mild asthma. INTERVENTION: Placebo or salmeterol 50, 100, 200 micrograms given on separate days followed two hours later by inhaled salbutamol in cumulative doses up to 3600 micrograms. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Change in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), heart rate, plasma potassium concentration, QTc interval, tremor amplitude, and creatine kinase myocardial isoenzyme concentration. RESULTS: Compared with placebo, the mean (95% confidence interval) changes in FEV1 and heart rate after salmeterol 200 micrograms were 0.61 (0.32 to 0.90) l and 7.0 (3.8 to 10.2) beats/min. Adding salbutamol caused a large increase in FEV1 after placebo (0.69 l) with progressively smaller changes after increasing doses of salmeterol (0.19 l after salmeterol 200 micrograms). Heart rate and QTc interval increased and plasma potassium concentration decreased roughly in parallel on the four study days with a suggestion of convergence at higher doses of salbutamol. Geometric mean dose equivalences for salmeterol 50 micrograms and 100 micrograms compared with salbutamol were 4.9 and 7.8 (mean 6.4) for FEV1 and ranged from 7.1 (2.9 to 17.0) to 12.6 (4.4 to 36.4) for heart rate, plasma potassium, and tremor (mean 9.5). CONCLUSIONS: The effect of adding salbutamol to salmeterol is largely additive. Weight for weight salmeterol may be up to 10 times more potent than salbutamol. Considering its longer duration of action salmeterol 50 micrograms twice daily could be equivalent to salbutamol in doses up to 500 micrograms four to six hourly.
A precipitation process is used to produce combined particles consisting of two antiasthmatic drugs: salmeterol xinafoate and fluticasone propionate. To control the crystallisation of these particles, a micromixer is used to mix solvent and antisolvent flow. To produce particles in the respirable range, crystal growth inhibitors are added to the antisolvent flow. The obtained suspension is spray-dried afterwards to get a dry powder which can be further processed into inhalation drug products. It is found that a combination of polysorbate 80 and hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose (HPMC) represents the best excipient combination. It is supposed that the smaller molecule polysorbate rapidly stabilises the particle surface and with this inhibits crystal growth, whereas HPMC is observed to produce spherical particles during the spray-drying process acting as lubricant and dispersion-modifier. The processed particles show a needlelike habit and, therefore, tend to form aggregates. When dispersed from an inhaler device, they are only moderately disaggregated. The deposition of the single drugs salmeterol xinafoate and fluticasone propionate on the stages of the NGI shows a very uniform distribution, indicating that both drugs are evenly dispensed, with an FPF of about 22% for the combined particles which corresponds to the deposition of the marketed product.
BACKGROUND: Chromatographic methods have been used for the simultaneous determination of salmeterol (SMT) and fluticasone (FLU). The methods take a lot of analysis time, need sample pre-treatment and large amounts of solvents, and are costly. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this paper was to propose a simple, quick, and low-cost method for the determination of SMT and FLU using a time series neural network and multivariate calibration methods, including partial least-squares (PLS) and principal component regression (PCR). METHODS: The simultaneous spectrophotometric determination of SMT and FLU in binary mixtures and anti-asthma spray was performed by applying multivariate calibration methods and an intelligent approach. RESULTS: The coefficient of determination (R2) of the time series neural network was obtained: 1 and 0.9997 for SMT and FLU, respectively. The mean recovery of PLS was found to be 99.29% and 99.84% for SMT and FLU, respectively. Also, the mean recovery related to the PCR method was 102.05% and 103.72% for SMT and FLU, respectively. CONCLUSION: The inhalation spray was assessed using HPLC and the results were compared with chemometrics methods via an analysis of variance (ANOVA) test. HIGHLIGHTS: Intelligent and multivariate calibration methods were proposed. Simultaneous spectrophotometric determination of salmeterol and fluticasone was studied in an anti-asthma spray. HPLC as a reference method was performed and compared with chemometrics methods. Rapid, simple, low-cost, and accurate are the benefits of the proposed approaches.
BACKGROUND: Fluticasone propionate 50 mug/salmeterol xinafoate 25 mug (FP/SAL) is widely used in adults and children with asthma, but there is sparse information on its use in very young children. METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, multicentre, controlled trial conducted in children aged 8 months to 4 years. During a 2-week run-in period, they all received FP twice daily. At randomization, they commenced FP/SAL or FP twice daily for 8 weeks. All were then given FP/SAL only, in a 16-week open-label study continuation. Medications were inhaled through an AeroChamber Plus with attached face mask. The primary end-point was mean change in total asthma symptom scores from baseline to the last 7 days of the double-blind period. Analyses were undertaken in all children randomized to treatment and who received at least one dose of study medication. RESULTS: Three hundred children were randomized 1:1 to receive FP/SAL or FP. Mean change from baseline in total asthma symptom scores was -3.97 for FP/SAL and -3.01 with FP. The between-group difference was not statistically significant (P = 0.21; 95% confidence interval: -2.47, 0.54). No new safety signals were seen with FP/SAL. CONCLUSION: This is the first randomized, double-blind study of this size to evaluate FP/SAL in very young children with asthma. FP/SAL did not show superior efficacy to FP; no clear add-on effect of SAL was demonstrated. No clinically significant differences in safety were noted with FP/SAL usage.
BACKGROUND: The effectiveness of a fix-dose salmeterol/fluticasone combination therapy in asthma was previously shown for the original product. The study aim was to evaluate the clinical effectiveness and safety of a second entry DPI - dry powder inhaler (Salflumix Easyhaler) in patients with asthma in everyday clinical practice. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This multicenter Investigator-Initiated Study that enrolled 2,037 adult outpatients with asthma treated with Salflumix Easyhaler, was conducted by 220 pulmonologists across Poland. Asthma control was assessed during 3 visits with 6 +/- 2 weeks intervals based on the Asthma Control Test (ACT). In addition, patient Satisfaction with Asthma Treatment Questionnaire (SATQ) and adherence and adverse events (AEs) were monitored. RESULTS: During the observation (86 +/- 30 days) the percentage of patients with controlled asthma (ACT 20-25 pts) increased from 35.5% at the first visit to 86.5% at the third visit (p < 0.001). In the subgroup analysis, there were more patients not obtaining asthma control among patients that switched from the treatment with other devices than in naive ones. Global SATQ scores increased from 5.8 +/- 0.7 to 6.2 +/- 0.6 during the observation. Patients' satisfaction with the use of the Salflumix Easyhaler was high. Adherence exceeded 95%. Eight AEs were reported. CONCLUSIONS: Salflumix Easyhaler is highly effective and well-tolerated by naive patients with asthma and those switching from another device. In general, patients show good compliance with medical product and are satisfied with the use of this new device, and not reporting difficulties and errors related to its' use. Their physicians' overall perception of Salflumix Easyhaler use is very positive.
