The currently available drugs for long-term treatment of obesity are sibutramine and orlistat. They have been shown to be able to induce significant weight loss, with important co-morbidity reduction, allowing the maintenance of reduced body weight for at least 1-2 years. Cardiostimulating and gastrointestinal adverse effects are however not negligible.
Adulteration of botanical food supplements with undeclared synthetic drugs is a common problem. One of the most affected product groups are the slimming agents. There are no analytical protocols for the detection of synthetic adulterants from these products. The present study aimed at the development of a multistep analytical method for the quick and reliable determination of sibutramine, one of the most common adulterants among botanical food supplements. The extract of a sibutramine-containing slimming formula was analysed by colour tests, TLC, HPLC-DAD, MS and NMR. The multistep method proposed by the authors allows the quick identification of sibutramine in counterfeit samples in laboratories with different instrumentation.
We present the case of a young woman presenting to a military field hospital in Afghanistan with a non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) associated with the diet drug sibutramine. We also provide a brief literature review on the association between sibutramine and myocardial infarction.
Weight gain is a known risk factor for the development of type 2 diabetes and even modest weight reduction can reduce the risk of developing diabetes, so controlling body weight is an important public health goal in the fight against diabetes and its comorbidities. Weight reduction is also a cornerstone of diabetes management, improving glycaemic control and reducing other risk factors associated with this disease. Pharmacotherapies such as sibutramine contribute to the management of type 2 diabetes in overweight and obese patients.
[reaction: see text] An efficient method has been developed to prepare all four isomers of the hydroxyl derivatives of sibutramine by addition of Grignard reagents (R)- or (S)-5 to a single enantiomer of sulfinyl imine (R)-1 simply by tuning the reaction solvent. The phenomenon of the reversed diastereoselectivity in CH(2)Cl(2) and THF implied that the reaction may proceed through a chelated cyclic transition state in CH(2)Cl(2) and nonchelated acyclic transition state in THF.
INTRODUCTION: The prevalence of obesity, a serious public health problem, is increasing among teenagers and thus also increases cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in adulthood. OBJECTIVE: To provide a systematic review of the best evidence about the effect of sibutramine and orlistat in weight loss, quality of life and its adverse effects in adolescents diagnosed with obesity. METHODS: We searched electronic databases and bibliographies of selected articles were inspected for any further reference. We included only randomized controlled trials that met a set of predefined criteria. The studies were reviewed by a narrative synthesis. RESULTS: We included 6 randomized controlled trials of sibutramine and 3 of orlistat. The majority reached a moderate to high methodological quality. Sibutramine and orlistat showed a reduction in body mass index (BMI) that was significantly higher compared with the placebo group. We also found a variation of weight with these drugs significantly better than placebo. Only one trial evaluated the quality of life. The incidence of adverse effects was similar for sibutramine and placebo, except for tachycardia. The most common adverse reactions associated with orlistat were gastrointestinal, mild to moderate. CONCLUSIONS: Sibutramine and orlistat in combination with a hypocaloric diet and changes in lifestyle in obese adolescents achieve a short-term loss of weight greater than that achieved through the dietary-behavioral therapy alone.
The acute hepatic porphyrias can cause life-threatening attacks of neurovisceral symptoms that mimic other acute medical conditions. Variegate porphyria caused by mutations in the protoporphyrinogen oxidase (PPOX) gene is a latent disorder characterized by exacerbations induced by fasting, alcohol consumption or certain drugs. We describe the case of a 46-year-old female patient presenting with a first episode of symptomatic porphyria after 10 d of sibutramine treatment for weight loss. Genetic analysis showed a heterozygous R168H hot spot mutation in the PPOX gene. A putative effect of sibutramine on the hepatic haem biosynthetic pathway and reduced food intake have likely caused this exacerbation of a porphyria attack. Although this may be the first case report of this kind, the risk of acute porphyria should be considered in patients using pharmacotherapy for obesity.
INTRODUCTION: Obesity is associated with numerous health problems, particularly metabolic and cardiovascular complications. This study aimed to assess the effects that, nine months of pharmacological intervention with orlistat or sibutramine, on obese Malaysians' body weight and compositions, metabolic profiles and inflammatory marker. METHODS: Seventy-six obese subjects were randomly placed into two groups. The first group received three daily 120 mg dosages of orlistat for nine months (n=39), and the second group received a once daily 10 or 15 mg dosage of sibutramine for nine months (n=37). Baseline measurements for weight, body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (WC), body fat percentage (BF), visceral fat (VF), adiponectin, fasting plasma glucose (FPG), fasting insulin, pancreatic B cell secretory capacity (HOMA%B), insulin sensitivity (HOMA%S), insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and serum high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) were performed and repeated during the sixth and ninth months of treatment. RESULTS: Twenty-four subjects completed the trial in both groups. For both groups, weight, BMI, WC, BF, VF, HOMA-IR and hs-CRP were significantly lower at the end of the nine month intervention. However, there were no significant differences between the two groups for these parameters with nine months treatment. There was a significant decrease in FPG in orlistat group; while fasting insulin and HOMA%B reduced in sibutramine group. For both groups, there were also significant increases in adiponectin levels and HOMA%S at the end of the nine month intervention. CONCLUSION: Nine months of treatment with orlistat and sibutramine not only reduced weight but also significantly improved BMI, WC, BF, VF, FPG, adiponectin, fasting insulin, HOMA%B, HOMA%S, HOMA-IR and hs-CRP. These improvements could prove useful in the reduction of metabolic and cardiovascular risks in obese subjects.
Monohydrated sibutramine hydrochloride is a widely used active ingredient for the treatment of obesity. An anhydrous form of sibutramine hydrochloride was prepared starting from its monohydrate form upon heating it at 140 degrees C for 15 min. This dehydration process was monitored using conventional TG/DSC methods. Heated above 190 degrees C, sibutramine hydrochloride sublimes and recrystallizes on the cold walls of the test tube, giving platelet shaped crystals suitable for single crystal X-ray diffraction analysis: monoclinic, P2(1)/n, a = 7.321(2) A, b = 25.456(5) A, c = 9.750(3) A, beta = 101.60(2) degrees , V = 1779.9(8) A(3), Z = 4. At variance, sibutramine free base was typically recovered as a viscous oily material, upon treatment of its hydrochloride salt in ethyl acetate solution. Recrystallization from hexane yielded a white polycrystalline powder, the structure of which was determined by unconventional ab initio X-ray powder diffraction analysis: triclinic, P-1, a = 8.6578(3) A, b = 9.3318(3) A, c = 11.1224(4) A, alpha = 110.434(3) degrees , beta = 100.159(3) degrees , gamma = 89.201(2) degrees , V = 827.76(5) A(3), Z = 2. Sibutramine, in its different crystalline environments, was also fully characterized by solid state (13)C NMR analyses. Additional spectral information was obtained by collecting spectra of a metastable, oily sample, before it slowly recrystallizes (within hours).
AIMS: To review the major trials that evaluated the efficacy and safety of the use of sibutramine for weight loss and the impact of this agent on obesity-related disorders. METHODS AND RESULTS: The most important articles on sibutramine up to January 2009 were located by a PubMed and Medline search. Sibutramine reduces food intake and body weight more than placebo and has positive effects on the lipid profile (mainly triglycerides and high density lipoprotein cholesterol), glycemic control and inflammatory markers in studies for up to one year. Preliminary studies showed that sibutramine may also improve other obesity-associated disorders such as polycystic ovary syndrome, left ventricular hypertrophy, binge eating disorder and adolescent obesity. The high discontinuation rates and some safety issues mainly due to the increase in blood pressure and pulse rate have to be considered. Additionally, it has not yet been established that treatment with sibutramine will reduce cardiovascular events and total mortality. CONCLUSIONS: Sibutramine, in conjunction with lifestyle measures, is a useful drug for reducing body weight and improving associated cardiometabolic risk factors and obesity-related disorders. Studies of longer duration are required to determine the precise indications of the drug, to evaluate safety issues and to assess its efficacy on cardiovascular mortality.
Controlled studies have shown that sibutramine produces dose-related weight loss when given in the range 5-30 mg per day, with optimal doses of 10 and 15 mg per day. Weight loss with sibutramine is 3-5 kg better than placebo at 24 weeks, and weight loss is maintained to 52 weeks at doses of 10 and 15 mg. By six months, 69% of patients treated with sibutramine 15 mg achieve a 5% or greater reduction in their baseline weight. The weight loss achieved with sibutramine was similar to that achieved with dexfenfluramine over 12 weeks (4.5 kg compared with 3.2 kg). Sibutramine-induced weight loss has been found to be accompanied by a significant reduction in waist/hip ratio, and decreases in plasma triglycerides, total cholesterol and low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol. There were also increases in high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. In patients with type II diabetes, sibutramine-induced weight loss was accompanied by a shift towards improved glycaemic control. In controlled studies, 84% of sibutramine-treated patients reported adverse events, compared with 71% of patients receiving placebo. The most frequently reported adverse events are related to pharmacological actions of sibutramine, and include dry mouth, decreased appetite, constipation and insomnia.
Sibutramine is a selective serotonin and noradrenaline re-uptake inhibitor approved for the long-term management of obesity. Its primary mechanism of action is increased satiety, although some evidence also suggests increased energy expenditure could play a role in sibutramine-induced weight loss. It has established general efficacy in long-term trials, with clinically-approved doses of 10 and 15 mg. Sibutramine has also been studied in a number of unique populations, including obese controlled hypertensives, diabetics and ethnic minorities, further establishing its effectiveness. However, it does have a consistent effect of increasing blood pressure and pulse. Thus, blood pressure and heart rate should be monitored in patients using sibutramine and it may not be applicable in obese patients with significant cardiovascular disease.
Metformin (850-1700 mg) plus sibutramine (10-20 mg, n=13) or placebo (n=15) was administered for 12 weeks in olanzapine-treated chronic schizophrenia patients. Weight loss was similar in both groups: -2.8+/-3.2 kg vs. -1.4+/-2.6 kg. Except for preventing a triglyceride increase, the drug combination lacked efficacy for metabolic control in this clinical population.
With the recent approval of methylphenidate (MPH) for treating attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adults, the number of patients exposed will increase tremendously. The ongoing debate on the cardiovascular safety of MPH has triggered two large retrospective cohort studies in children and adolescents as well as in young to middle-aged adults. These studies looked into serious cardiovascular events (sudden cardiac death, acute myocardial infarction and stroke) as primary endpoints and concluded that MPH was safe after a mean duration of 2.1 years of follow-up in children and adolescents and mean duration of 0.33 years of current use in adults. The results are encouraging with respect to the short- and medium-term use of MPH. Without the inherent limitations of retrospective cohort studies, a prospective randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial in individuals stratified for cardiovascular risk factors would allow for an optimized risk assessment. With many millions of patients treated per year and drawing parallels to the lately discovered risks of sibutramine, another sympathomimetic with an overlapping mode of action and similar side effects on heart rate and blood pressure, we hypothesize that such a trial might be a dedicated risk mitigation strategy for public health. A critical assessment of cardiovascular side effects of MPH appears particularly warranted, because ADHD is associated with obesity, smoking and poor health in general. We summarize recent findings with the focus on cardiovascular risks of MPH in humans; we additionally analyze the limited number of rodent studies that have addressed cardiovascular risks of MPH.
BACKGROUND: Chronic obesity is associated with various cardiovascular disorders, including diabetes, dyslipidemia, and hypertension. Pharmacotherapy with antiobesity agents is an important management strategy in conjunction with lifestyle interventions. OBJECTIVE: This article describes the pharmacologic management of obesity, concentrating on orlistat and sibutramine. METHODS: Relevant articles were identified through a MEDLINE search (1966-February 2002) using the terms obesity, overweight, weight loss, antiobesity drugs, orlistat, and sibutramine. The search for efficacy trials was limited to randomized controlled studies of >6 months' duration. Also included in the review were relevant references cited in the bibliographies of identified articles, news reports, and the authors' own data. RESULTS: Orlistat reduces fat absorption by inhibiting gastrointestinal lipases. In randomized, controlled trials of up to 2 years' duration, orlistat plus a hypocaloric diet produced significantly greater weight loss than placebo (P < 0.001). In the maintenance phase, patients taking orlistat had less weight regain than did placebo recipients. The weight reduction with orlistat was also associated with a significant improvement in control of cardiovascular risk factors (P < 0.05). Unlike orlistat, sibutramine works by suppressing appetite; its efficacy, however, was similar to that of orlistat in the identified clinical trials. Orlistat was associated primarily with gastrointestinal side effects. Use of orlistat was associated with minimal drug interactions, except with cyclosporine, with which it should not be taken. Sibutramine was also well tolerated, although it may cause dry mouth, anorexia, and insomnia, and should be used with caution in patients at risk for cardiovascular disease. CONCLUSIONS: Orlistat and sibutramine demonstrated a favorable efficacy and safety profile in randomized controlled trials. Current evidence supports their use as adjuncts to lifestyle modifications in the treatment of obesity.
