Sildenafil, a phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitor with a vasodilatory and anti-remodeling effect, has been investigated concerning various conditions during pregnancy. Per indication, we herein review the rationale and the most relevant experimental and clinical studies, including systematic reviews and meta-analyses, when available. Indications for using sildenafil during the second and third trimester of pregnancy include maternal pulmonary hypertension, preeclampsia, preterm labor, fetal growth restriction, oligohydramnios, fetal distress, and congenital diaphragmatic hernia. For most indications, the rationale for administering prenatal sildenafil is based on limited, equivocal data from in vitro studies and rodent disease models. Clinical studies report mild maternal side effects and suggest good fetal tolerance and safety depending on the underlying pathology.
BACKGROUND: Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) persists as one of the foremost factors contributing to mortality and morbidity in extremely preterm infants. The effectiveness of administering sildenafil early on to prevent BPD remains uncertain. The aim of this study was to investigate the efficacy and safety of prophylactically administered sildenafil during the early life stages of preterm infants to prevent mortality and BPD. METHODS: MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature, and Ichushi were searched. Published randomized controlled trials (RCTs), non-RCTs, interrupted time series, cohort studies, case-control studies, and controlled before-and-after studies were included. Two reviewers independently screened the title, abstract, and full text, extracted data, assessed the risk of bias, and evaluated the certainty of evidence (CoE) following the Grading of Recommendations Assessment and Development and Evaluation approach. The random-effects model was used for a meta-analysis of RCTs. RESULTS: This review included three RCTs (162 infants). There were no significant differences between the prophylactic sildenafil and placebo groups in mortality (risk ratio [RR]: 1.32; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.16-10.75; very low CoE), BPD (RR: 1.20; 95% CI: 0.79-1.83; very low CoE), and all other outcome assessed (all with very low CoE). The sample sizes were less than the optimal sizes for all outcomes assessed, indicating the need for further trials. CONCLUSIONS: The prophylactic use of sildenafil in individuals at risk of BPD did not indicate any advantageous effects in terms of mortality, BPD, and other outcomes, or increased side effects.
OBJECTIVES: To explore the differences in the efficacy and safety of oral sirolimus and sildenafil in the treatment of pediatric intractable lymphatic malformations (LMs). METHODS: From January 2014 to May 2022, we retrospectively enrolled children with intractable LMs treated with oral drugs (sirolimus or sildenafil) and divided the patients into sirolimus and sildenafil groups from Beijing Children's Hospital (BCH). Clinical features, treatment, and follow-up data were collected and analyzed. The indicators were the ratio of reduction in lesion volume pre and posttreatment, the number of patients with improved clinical symptoms, and adverse reactions to the two drugs. RESULTS: Twenty-four children in the sildenafil group and 31 children in the sirolimus group were included in the present study. The effective rate in the sildenafil group was 54.2% (13/24), with a median lesion volume reduction ratio of 0.32 (-0.23, 0.89) and clinical symptoms improved in 19 patients (79.2%). On the contrary, the effective rate in the sirolimus group was 93.5% (29/31), with a median lesion volume reduction ratio of 0.68 (0.34, 0.96), and clinical symptoms improved in 30 patients (96.8%). There were significant differences (p < 0.05) between the two groups. Regarding safety, four patients in the sildenafil group and 23 patients in the sirolimus group with mild adverse reactions were reported. CONCLUSION: Both sildenafil and sirolimus can reduce the volume of LMs and improve clinical symptoms in partial patients with intractable LMs. Sirolimus is more effective than sildenafil and the adverse reactions associated with both drugs are mild and controllable. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: III Laryngoscope, 133:3192-3199, 2023.
Cerebral stroke, traumatic brain injury, and hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy are among the most frequently occurring brain injuries. A complex pathogenesis, characterized by a synergistic interaction between alterations of the cerebrovascular system, cell death, and inflammation, is at the basis of the brain damage that leads to behavioral and neurodevelopmental disabilities in affected subjects. Sildenafil is a selective inhibitor of the enzyme phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) that is able to cross the blood-brain barrier. Preclinical data suggest that sildenafil may be a good candidate for the prevention or repair of brain injury in both adults and neonates. The aim of this review is to summarize the evidence supporting the neuroprotective action of sildenafil and discuss the possible benefits of the association of sildenafil with current therapeutic strategies.
INTRODUCTION: Spinal cord injury (SCI) is estimated to affect approximately 276,000 individuals in the United States. Since 2010, the mean age of individuals at the time of the SCI has been 42 years, with nearly 80% of cases involving men. This means that individuals with SCI generally are young men who typically place a great deal of importance on normal sexual and reproductive function. AIM: To assess the effect of sildenafil treatment on erectile function and the frequency of ejaculation in men with SCI. METHODS: This study was a post hoc analysis of pooled data from two randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, flexible-dose, crossover sildenafil trials conducted in Europe, Australia, and Turkey. Two hundred forty-eight men at least 18 years old with traumatic SCI of at least 6 months' duration, with erectile dysfunction solely attributed to SCI, and in a stable heterosexual relationship were treated sequentially with sildenafil and placebo. Exclusion criteria included taking nitrate therapy, severe cardiac failure, and recent stroke or myocardial infarction. The starting sildenafil dose was 50 mg, taken approximately 1 hour before sexual activity, with subsequent dose adjustment to 100 or 25 mg based on efficacy and safety during treatment. There was a 2-week washout between 6-week treatments. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Change from baseline in International Index of Erectile Function question 3 (frequency of penetration), question 4 (maintaining erection after penetration), question 9 (frequency of ejaculation), and erectile function domain scores; intercourse success; and treatment preference. RESULTS: All International Index of Erectile Function outcomes, including achieving and maintaining erections and ejaculation frequency, were statistically significantly greater with sildenafil vs placebo, including the subgroup with complete SCI (P < .01 for all comparisons). The percentage of successful intercourse attempts with sildenafil (53% vs 12%) and preference for sildenafil (96% vs 4%) vs placebo were significant (P < .001), including the subgroup with complete SCI. The most common all-cause adverse events with sildenafil were headache (16.1%) and urinary tract infection (11.6%). CONCLUSION: Sildenafil significantly improves erections, intercourse success, and ejaculation frequency vs placebo, including in men with complete SCI. Sildenafil is an effective and well-tolerated treatment for sexual dysfunction in men with SCI. The increase in frequency of ejaculation could allow the possibility of having children without medical intervention in this patient population. Ohl DA, Carlsson M, Stecher VJ, Rippon GA. Efficacy and Safety of Sildenafil in Men With Sexual Dysfunction and Spinal Cord Injury. Sex Med Rev 2017;5:521-528.
RATIONALE: Sildenafil, a well-known vasodilator known to interfere with purinergic signaling through effects on cGMP, is a mainstay in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension (PH). However, little is known regarding its effects on the metabolic reprogramming of vascular cells, which is a hallmark of PH. Purine metabolism, especially intracellular de novo purine biosynthesis is essential for vascular cell proliferation. Since adventitial fibroblasts are critical contributors to proliferative vascular remodeling in PH, in this study we aimed to investigate if sildenafil, beyond its well-known vasodilator role in smooth muscle cells, impacts intracellular purine metabolism and proliferation of fibroblasts derived from human PH patients. METHODS: Integrated omics approaches (plasma and cell metabolomics) and pharmacological inhibitor approaches were employed in plasma samples and cultured pulmonary artery fibroblasts from PH patients. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Plasma metabolome analysis of 27 PH patients before and after treatment with sildenafil, demonstrated a partial, but specific effect of sildenafil on purine metabolites, especially adenosine, adenine, and xanthine. However, circulating markers of cell stress, including lactate, succinate, and hypoxanthine were only decreased in a small subset of sildenafil-treated patients. To better understand potential effects of sildenafil on pathological changes in purine metabolism (especially purine synthesis) in PH, we performed studies on pulmonary fibroblasts from PAH patients (PH-Fibs) and corresponding controls (CO-Fibs), since these cells have previously been shown to demonstrate stable and marked PH associated phenotypic and metabolic changes. We found that PH-Fibs exhibited significantly increased purine synthesis. Treatment of PH-Fibs with sildenafil was insufficient to normalize cellular metabolic phenotype and only modestly attenuated the proliferation. However, we observed that treatments which have been shown to normalize glycolysis and mitochondrial abnormalities including a PKM2 activator (TEPP-46), and the histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), SAHA and Apicidin, had significant inhibitory effects on purine synthesis. Importantly, combined treatment with HDACi and sildenafil exhibited synergistic inhibitory effects on proliferation and metabolic reprogramming in PH-Fibs. CONCLUSIONS: While sildenafil alone partially rescues metabolic alterations associated with PH, treatment with HDACi, in combination with sildenafil, represent a promising and potentially more effective strategy for targeting vasoconstriction, metabolic derangement and pathological vascular remodeling in PH.
Sildenafil (SIL) is widely used to treat erectile dysfunction. Information on its consumption and the factors influencing its use is limited in China. In this study, we sampled composite influent wastewater samples from 33 Chinese cities and analyzed SIL using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. SIL consumption was estimated using wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) and ranged from 10.6 mg/d/1000 people to 132 mg/d/1000 people, with a mean of 53 mg/d/1000 people. Prescription sales (3570 kg) accounted for 13.3% of the estimated SIL use (26842 kg) in 2018, thereby implying that SIL illicit use was greater than prescription use in China. Some regional differences were observed in SIL use, which was significantly higher in North China than South China (p < 0.05), thereby reflecting that the prevalence of SIL was affected by differences in lifestyle and socioeconomic factors. We found significant positive correlations between SIL use and consumption of allopurinol, hydrochlorothiazide, nicotine, and alcohol, thereby suggesting that the prevalence of SIL was associated with the prevalence of gout, hypertension, smoking, and drinking. Moreover, age structures, internet use, and marriage rates were positively correlated with SIL use, whereas the unemployment rate was negatively correlated with SIL use. Our study demonstrates that WBE is valuable for medical research to investigate licit and illicit drug use and to assess the underlying associations of different chemical uses.
BACKGROUND: The number of studies associating the use of sildenafil in gestation is increasing. This drug inhibits phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5), an enzyme responsible for degradation of nitric oxide, and its efficacy is greater in the placental territory, as the maternal side of the placenta have more PDE5 than other sites. For this reason, promising results have been observed related to the prevention of preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction and to improvement of maternal-fetal morbidity in cases of placental insufficiency. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the benefits of using sildenafil in pregnancy. SEARCHED STRATEGY: MEDLINE, ClinicalTrials.gov, Embase, LILACS and Cochrane databases were searched through September 2018. There was no restriction in language or year of publication. This study was registered in PROSPERO (CRD42017060288). SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized clinical trials which used sildenafil for treatment or prevention of obstetric diseases compared with placebo were selected. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: The results were obtained using the inverse variance method for continuous variables and Man-Whitney for categorical variables. MAIN RESULTS: Among a population of 598 pregnant women from the seven clinical trials included, 139 had pre-eclampsia, 275 had intrauterine growth restriction, and 184 had oligohydramnios. A significant increase of 222.58 grams [27.75 to 417.41] was observed in the fetal weight at birth of patients taking sildenafil. The other outcomes did not show any statistical significance. This may be due to the small number of patients used in each study and the great heterogeneity between the groups. CONCLUSIONS: Sildenafil could be associated with increasing fetal weight at birth in placental insufficiency despite the limitations of this meta-analysis, even though more studies in this field are needed to introduce this drug into obstetric clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare disease in children, with significant mortality. Because of the limited research on pediatric PAH, first, systematic review of related drugs is conducted, and then economic evaluation of PAH drug treatment programs is conducted, which to provide a reference for the choice of more cost-effective treatment options. METHODS: The search includes electronic databases such as Pubmed, ScienceDirect, and Embase. Through inclusion and exclusion criteria, screen high-quality randomized controlled trials. We used TreeAge Pro 2011 software to construct the markov model, that to simulate the total medical cost and quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), and to calculate the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio. Sensitivity analysis of transfer probability, utility, and cost was carried out. RESULTS: Incorporate two studies that meet the criteria, one compared the therapeutic effects of bosentan and placebo on pediatric PAH, the other compared therapeutic effects of sildenafil and placebo on pediatric PAH, both articles were of good quality. Compared with the sildenafil group (3.38QALYs and $161,120.14), the QALY of the bosentan treatment group (3.33QALYs and $257,411.29) was reduced by 0.05, and the cost increased by $96,291.15. The estimated improvement to quality of life and reduced costs result in an estimate of economic dominance for sildenafil over bosentan. This dominant result persisted probabilistic analyses. CONCLUSIONS: Based on this model, a more cost-effective treatment drug for PAH in children is sildenafil.
This study aimed to develop an LC-MS/MS method for determining sildenafil and its metabolites N-desmethylsildenafil and N1,N4-desmethylsildenafil in human plasma and applying it to a pharmacokinetic study of sildenafil in healthy volunteers. Sildenafil-d8 was used as the internal standard. Plasma samples were pretreated via protein precipitation with acetonitrile. The extractives were then separated on an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 (50-mm x 2.1-mm, 1.7-mum) column using gradient elution. The aqueous and organic mobile phases were ammonium formate 2 mM supplemented with 0.1% formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively, and the flow rate was 0.3 mL/min. An electrospray ionization source was applied, and multiple reaction monitoring was operated in the positive mode with selective channels at m/z 475.30 --> 100.10, 461.20 --> 283.30, 483.30 --> 108.10, and 449.00 --> 283.00 for sildenafil, sildenafil-d8, N-desmethylsildenafil, and N1,N4-desmethylsildenafil, respectively. The linear calibration curves of sildenafil and its metabolites spanned 1.0-1000 ng/mL. The lower limit of quantification was 1.0 ng/mL. The extractive recovery of analytes from the biological matrix was more than 90% and the matrix effect complied with relevant provisions. The intra- and inter-day precisions of sildenafil and its metabolite were <10%. The intra- and inter-day accuracy of sildenafil, N-desmethylsildenafil, and N1,N4-desmethylsildenafil was more than 99%. The method is highly sensitive and selective, and it was successfully applied to the bioequivalence studies of 100-mg sildenafil citrate tablets in 40 healthy Chinese volunteers.
To elucidate whether the pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) of sildenafil are influenced differently when it is coadministered with bosentan (S+B) or with ambrisentan (S+A), we evaluated the PK and PD profiles of sildenafil before and after 4-5 weeks of S+A or S+B treatment in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. The area under the plasma concentration-time curve of sildenafil was significantly higher in S+A treatment than in S+B treatment (165.8 ng*h/mL vs. 396.8 ng*h/mL, P = 0.018) and the oral clearance of sildenafil was significantly lower after S+A treatment than after S+B treatment (120.6 L/h/kg vs. 50.4 L/h/kg, P = 0.018). In the PD study, incremental shuttle walking distance was superior during treatment with S+A than during treatment with S+B (S+B; 280 m vs. S+A; 340 m, P = 0.042). There were no concerns about safety with either combination therapy regime.
BACKGROUND: The benefit of sildenafil in patients with advanced idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) at risk of poor outcomes from pulmonary hypertension, whether already present or likely to develop, is uncertain. We aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of sildenafil added to pirfenidone versus placebo added to pirfenidone for 52 weeks in patients with advanced IPF and at risk of group 3 pulmonary hypertension. METHODS: We did a multicentre, international, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2b study at 56 university clinics, research hospitals, and tertiary sites in Canada, Europe (Belgium, Czech Republic, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, and Turkey), Israel, and Africa (Egypt and South Africa). Eligible patients (aged 40-80 years) had advanced IPF (carbon monoxide diffusing capacity </=40% predicted at screening), and were at risk of group 3 pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary artery pressure of >/=20 mm Hg with pulmonary artery wedge pressure of </=15 mm Hg on previous right-heart catheterisation, or intermediate or high probability of group 3 pulmonary hypertension on echocardiography as defined by the 2015 European Society of Cardiology and European Respiratory Society guidelines). Patients were randomly assigned 1:1 to oral sildenafil tablets (20 mg three times daily) or placebo, both in addition to oral pirfenidone capsules (801 mg three times daily), using a validated interactive voice-based or web-based response system with permuted block randomisation, stratified by previous right-heart catheterisation (yes or no) and forced expiratory volume in 1 s to forced vital capacity ratio (<0.8 or >/=0.8). The composite primary endpoint was disease progression, defined as either a relevant decline in 6-min walk distance, respiratory-related admission to hospital, or all-cause mortality, after 52 weeks and was assessed in the intention-to-treat population; safety was assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of the study drug. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02951429, and is no longer recruiting. The 11-month safety follow-up is ongoing. FINDINGS: Between Jan 13, 2017, and Aug 30, 2018, 247 patients were screened for eligibility, 177 of whom were randomly assigned to a treatment group (n=88 sildenafil; n=89 placebo) and were assessed for the primary outcome. There was no difference in the proportion of patients with disease progression over 52 weeks between the sildenafil (64 [73%] of 88 patients) and placebo groups (62 [70%] of 89 patients; between-group difference 3.06% [95% CI -11.30 to 17.97]; p=0.65). Serious treatment-emergent adverse events were reported in 54 (61%) patients in the sildenafil group and 55 (62%) patients in the placebo group. Treatment-emergent adverse events leading to mortality occurred in 22 (25%) patients in the sildenafil group and 26 (29%) in the placebo group. INTERPRETATION: Addition of sildenafil to pirfenidone did not provide a treatment benefit versus pirfenidone plus placebo up to 52 weeks in patients with advanced IPF and risk of pulmonary hypertension. No new safety signals were identified with either treatment. Although the absence of a beneficial treatment effect suggests that sildenafil is not an appropriate treatment in the overall population, further research is required to establish if specific subgroups of patients with IPF might benefit from sildenafil. FUNDING: F Hoffmann-La Roche.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension is a multifactorial nosological entity that increases neonatal mortality as a result of heart failure. Pulmonary vasodilators are the cornerstone of treatment, of which sildenafil is the most commonly used drug. Therefore, the results of a recently updated Cochrane systematic review are summarized, in which the efficacy and safety of sildenafil for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension in neonates was evaluated.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) - the leading cause of vision loss in the elderly - share many risks factors as atherosclerosis, which exhibits loss of vascular compliance resulting from aging and oxidative stress. Here, we attempt to explore choroidal and retinal vascular compliance in patients with AMD by evaluating dynamic vascular changes using live ocular imaging following treatment with oral sildenafil citrate, a phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitor and potent vasodilator. Enhanced-depth imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT) and OCT angiography (OCT-A) were performed on 46 eyes of 23 subjects, including 15 patients with non-exudative AMD in one eye and exudative AMD in the fellow eye, and 8 age-matched control subjects. Choroidal thickness, choroidal vascularity, and retinal vessel density were measured across the central macula at 1 and 3 hours after a 100 mg oral dose of sildenafil citrate. Baseline choroidal thickness was 172.1 +/- 60.0 mum in non-exudative AMD eyes, 196.4 +/- 89.8 mum in exudative AMD eyes, and 207.4 +/- 77.7 mum in control eyes, with no difference between the 3 groups (P = 0.116). After sildenafil, choroidal thickness increased by 6.0% to 9.0% at 1 and 3 hours in all groups (P = 0.001-0.014). Eyes from older subjects were associated with choroidal thinning at baseline (P = 0.005) and showed less choroidal expansion at 1 hour and 3 hours after sildenafil (P = 0.001) regardless of AMD status (P = 0.666). The choroidal thickening appeared to be primarily attributed to expansion of the stroma rather than luminal component. Retinal vascular density remained unchanged after sildenafil in all 3 groups (P = 0.281-0.587). Together, our studies suggest that vascular response of the choroid to sildenafil decreases with age, but is not affected by the presence of non-exudative or exudative AMD, providing insight into changes in vessel compliance in aging and AMD.
CONCLUSIONS: Low dose oral sildenafil citrate tablets are safe and effective to decrease the lesions volume in some LMs children, especially with macrocystic lesion or mixed type. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of oral sildenafil in treatment of pediatric head and neck lymphatic malformations (LMs). SUBJECTS AND METHODS: In this open-label study, 21 children diagnosed with LMs were given oral sildenafil and stopped at week 24. Volume change of lesions compared with baseline was used to evaluate therapeutic outcome. The improvement of various symptoms and the adverse effects of sildenafil were recorded during the follow-up period. RESULTS: Eight patients (38.0%) showed excellent improvement (>75-100%), one patient (4.8%) had good (>50-75%), two patients (9.6%) had fair (>25-50%), three patients (14.3%) had minimal (0-25%), and seven patients (33.3%) had no improvement. The snoring or stridor completely disappeared in two subjects, although there was no apparent decrease in LMs size. Moreover, all three patients with macrocystic lesions displayed a positive response to sildenafil treatment, followed by mixed type (9/12, 75%). Only two out of six patients with microcystic lesions had minimal clearance. Only four patients showed transient mild diarrhea, there was no other adverse effect in this series.
Two groups of isomeric phosphodiestrase-type 5 inhibitors (PDE-5), consisting of four sildenafil- and three thiosildenafil-like analogues, have been successfully differentiated using high-resolution MS/MS. The optimised MS/MS data obtained from each compound were used to build a database with the aid of mass processing software. Isomeric compounds with very close chromatographic separation like dimethylsildenafil and homosildenafil could be distinguished by their unique fingerprint fragment ions in the MS/MS database. All fragment ions were within the mass tolerance of 5 ppm. One case study using an adulterated dietary supplement is included to provide more insights into this application.
