PURPOSE: To determine whether treatment with Plasmalyte-148 (PL) compared to sodium chloride 0.9% (SC) results in faster resolution of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and whether the acetate in PL potentiates ketosis. METHODS: We conducted a cluster, crossover, open-label, randomized, controlled Phase 2 trial at seven hospitals in adults admitted to intensive care unit (ICU) with severe DKA with hospital randomised to PL or SC as fluid therapy. The primary outcome, DKA resolution, was defined as a change in base excess to >/= - 3 mEq/L at 48 h. RESULTS: Ninety-three patients were enrolled with 90 patients included in the modified-intention-to-treat population (PL n = 48, SC n = 42). At 48 h, mean fluid administration was 6798 +/- 4850 ml vs 6574 +/- 3123 ml, median anion gap 6 mEq/L (IQR 5-7) vs 7 mEq/L (IQR 5-7) and median blood ketones 0.3 mmol/L (IQR 0.1-0.5) vs 0.3 (IQR 0.1-0.5) in the PL and SC groups. DKA resolution at 48 h occurred in 96% (PL) and 86% (SC) of patients; odds ratio 3.93 (95% CI 0.73-21.16, p = 0.111). At 24 h, DKA resolution occurred in 69% (PL) and 36% (SC) of patients; odds ratio 4.24 (95% CI 1.68-10.72, p = 0.002). The median ICU and hospital lengths of stay were 49 h (IQR 23-72) vs 55 h (IQR 41-80) and 81 h (IQR 58-137) vs 98 h (IQR 65-195) in the PL and SC groups. CONCLUSION: Plasmalyte-148, compared to sodium chloride 0.9%, may lead to faster resolution of metabolic acidosis in patients with DKA without an increase in ketosis. These findings need confirmation in a large, Phase 3 trial.
The solvent-free mechanochemical reaction has aroused increasing interest among scientists. Mechanical ball-milling can implement reactions under mild conditions, shorten the reaction time, and improve the reaction efficiency. Particularly, the most attractive characteristic of mechanochemistry is that it can alter the reaction pathway. However, few such examples have been reported so far. In this paper, we report the reaction of aldoximes with NaCl and Oxone under ball-milling conditions to afford N-acyloxyimidoyl chlorides, which are different from those of the liquid-phase counterpart.
This study explores the impact of varying concentrations of salt ions (0, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, and 12.5 mmol) on the physicochemical properties and 3D-printing performance of rice starch-curdlan composite gel. The relationship between gel structure, properties, printability, and printing accuracy was clarified through the evaluation of each parameter. The inclusion of an appropriate concentration of NaCl positively influenced the properties and printing characteristics of the composite gel. Specifically, a NaCl concentration of 7.5 mmol yielded the highest printing performance, achieving 98.61 % accuracy. Microstructural analysis indicates that the addition of ions promoted the formation of a denser network structure in the composite gel. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy reveals enhanced hydrogen bonding in the rice starch-curdlan gels with the addition of NaCl. Lastly, dysphagia testing demonstrates that the composite gels with 0-5 mmol NaCl concentrations exhibited grade 5 characteristics (clastic and wet) with satisfactory swallowing performance.
The development of a green system to solubilize cellulose from raw biomass is important, yet it is challenging because of the insolubility of cellulose in most solvents. Herein, a green NaCl-H2 O system is developed in which NaCl significantly enhances the dissolution and depolymerisation of cellulose from raw biomass. Nearly all the cellulose in the selected biomass types was dissolved and degraded into oligomers with molecular weights of 200-400 Da under relatively mild conditions. Cl(-) could interact strongly with the end OH group of the glucose unit in a 1:1 ratio, which resulted in the enhanced breaking of both inter- and intramolecular hydrogen bonds. In particular, the intermolecular hydrogen bond with an FTIR band at approximately v=3200 cm(-1) was disrupted significantly by Cl(-) . The FTIR band for a hydrogen bond between hemicellulose and lignin might appear at v=1636 cm(-1) , whereas this bond could be almost totally broken under hydrothermal conditions at 220  degrees C.
A survey was made of the NaCl tolerance of approximately 1,300 Streptomyces strains belonging to 313 species. The growth medium of the organisms was supplemented with a graded series of NaCl concentrations (4, 7, 10, and 13%). Only 1.8% of the species could not tolerate 4% NaCl; 26.9% could grow at a maximum of 4%; 49.7% could tolerate a maximum of 7%; 18.8% could grow at a maximum of 10%; and only 2.8% could tolerate 13% NaCl. In evaluating the relationships of NaCl tolerance to various taxonomic features, higher tolerance was statistically associated with the "yellow" and possibly the "white"-spored streptomycetes, whereas the "red"-spored series tended to have lesser tolerance. Higher tolerance was also indicated for spiny-spored species, as a group, than for smooth-spored forms. Likewise, nonproducers of melanin, collectively, were more NaCl tolerant than melanin-producing species. Uniformity of test responses between strains of species studied suggested the usefulness of NaCl tolerance as a taxonomic criterion.
In this work, the antifungal activity of rhamnolipids produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa #112 was evaluated against Aspergillus niger MUM 92.13 and Aspergillus carbonarius MUM 05.18. It was demonstrated that the di-rhamnolipid congeners were responsible for the antifungal activity exhibited by the crude rhamnolipid mixture, whereas mono-rhamnolipids showed a weak inhibitory activity. Furthermore, in the presence of NaCl (from 375 mM to 875 mM), the antifungal activity of the crude rhamnolipid mixture and the purified di-rhamnolipids was considerably increased. Dynamic Light Scattering studies showed that the size of the structures formed by the rhamnolipids increased as the NaCl concentration increased, being this effect more pronounced in the case of di-rhamnolipids. These results were confirmed by Confocal Scanning Laser Microscopy, which revealed the formation of giant vesicle-like structures (in the microm range) by self-assembling of the crude rhamnolipid mixture in the presence of 875 mM NaCl. In the case of the purified mono- and di-rhamnolipids, spherical structures (also in the microm range) were observed at the same conditions. The results herein obtained demonstrated a direct relationship between the rhamnolipids antifungal activity and their aggregation behaviour, opening the possibility to improve their biological activities for application in different fields.
The influence of pH (5.0-8.2), NaCl concentrations (0-6% w/v), and incubation time (0-24 h) on the inhibitory activity of nisin (0-100 I.U./ml) against Listeria monocytogenes (10(3) cfu/ml) was studied using the Doehlert experimental design and was confirmed by kinetic experiments. Predicted values were in agreement with experimental values. Experiments were carried out at 22 degrees C in reconstituted TSB-YE1 broth with or without NaCl. Nisin had an immediate pH-dependent bactericidal effect, which increased with decreasing pH values. In modified TSB-YE1 broth without NaCl, the bactericidal efficacy of nisin (50 I.U./ml) was maximum at pH 6.6, with no L. monocytogenes survivors until 120 h at 22 degrees C. Nisin (50 I.U./ml) action decreased in the presence of NaCl, with a minimal inhibitory effect between 2 and 4%. This partially protective effect was cancelled at higher levels of nisin.
Circular dichroism (CD) and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) measurements were made for three xanthan samples, a double helical polysaccharide, in 5 or 10 mM aqueous NaCl after rapid temperature change to investigate the kinetics of the conformational change between the ordered and disordered states. After the rapid heating, the CD signal mainly reflecting the carbonyl groups on the side chains quickly changed (<150 s) while the scattering intensity from SAXS around q (magnitude of the scattering vector) = 1 nm(-1) changed more gradually, reflecting the main-chain conformation. The difference between CD and SAXS implies us the intermediate conformation which can be regarded as a loose double helix. The SAXS profile in the rapid cooling process showed that the loose double helical structure was constructed within 150 s, but the CD signal slowly changed with around 2 days to recover the native tight double helix.
Protein quantification methods using spectrophotometry are widely used in laboratory routines for different purposes. Samples generally contain non-protein components that can interfere with the quality of the analysis. A simple and quick test with different concentrations of sodium chloride demonstrated that the Bradford method is significantly affected by the presence of salt, while Biuret remains stable. Therefore, the choice of method is an important factor in reducing errors and ensuring more reliable results.
The hydration structures of two different types of biomaterials, i.e., poly(2-methoxyethyl acrylate) (PMEA) and a random copolymer of 2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine and n-butyl methacrylate (P(MPC-r-BMA)), were investigated by means of attenuated total reflection infrared (ATR-IR) spectroscopy. The effects of the addition of sodium chloride to liquid water in contact with the surfaces of the polymer films were examined. The neutral polymer of PMEA was easily dehydrated by NaCl addition, whereas the zwitterionic polymer of P(MPC-r-BMA) was hardly dehydrated. More specifically, nonfreezing water having a strong interaction with the PMEA chain and freezing bound water having an intermediate interaction were hardly dehydrated by contacting with normal saline solution, whereas freezing water having a weak interaction with the PMEA chain was readily dehydrated. In contrast, freezing water in P(MPC-r-BMA) is exchanged for the saline solution contacting with the material surface without dehydration.
Extracellular nuclease activity in Staphylococcus aureus was enhanced about fourfold by 1% (w/v) NaCl, KCl, CsCl or LiCl. The pH and concentration of Ca2+ for optimum activity varied with the NaCl concentration; with an increased NaCl concentration, a higher Ca2+ concentration and a lower pH were required. Vmax, but not Km, varied with the concentration of NaCl. The addition of 3% (w/v) NaCl to growing cultures of S. aureus increased nuclease production fivefold.
BACKGROUND: Halophytes are the flora of saline soils. They adjust osmotically to soil salinity by accumulating ions and sequestering the vast majority of these (generally Na(+) and Cl(-)) in vacuoles, while in the cytoplasm organic solutes are accumulated to prevent adverse effects on metabolism. At high salinities, however, growth is inhibited. Possible causes are: toxicity to metabolism of Na(+) and/or Cl(-) in the cytoplasm; insufficient osmotic adjustment resulting in reduced net photosynthesis because of stomatal closure; reduced turgor for expansion growth; adverse cellular water relations if ions build up in the apoplast (cell walls) of leaves; diversion of energy needed to maintain solute homeostasis; sub-optimal levels of K(+) (or other mineral nutrients) required for maintaining enzyme activities; possible damage from reactive oxygen species; or changes in hormonal concentrations. SCOPE: This review discusses the evidence for Na(+) and Cl(-) toxicity and the concept of tissue tolerance in relation to halophytes. CONCLUSIONS: The data reviewed here suggest that halophytes tolerate cytoplasmic Na(+) and Cl(-) concentrations of 100-200 mm, but whether these ions ever reach toxic concentrations that inhibit metabolism in the cytoplasm or cause death is unknown. Measurements of ion concentrations in the cytosol of various cell types for contrasting species and growth conditions are needed. Future work should also focus on the properties of the tonoplast that enable ion accumulation and prevent ion leakage, such as the special properties of ion transporters and of the lipids that determine membrane permeability.
This paper examines evidence implicating migraine headache as a withdrawal symptom of excessive sodium chloride intake. Emerging research in food addiction posits that food and drug addictions share common features, such as withdrawal symptoms. Salt (sodium chloride) meets the criteria for the diagnosis of substance dependence, including withdrawal in which the substance is used to relieve withdrawal symptoms. The premonitory symptoms of migraine include food cravings for salty foods, which can alleviate migraine pain. Edema, possibly related to large amounts of salt consumed in binge eating, can cause approximately four pounds of retained fluid. This amount of fluid is similar to the fluid retained before the onset of migraine headache, which may be accompanied by polyuria. This paper proposes that inhibited withdrawal from highly processed food intake, rich in salt, mediates an association between increased sodium chloride intake and relief from migraine headache pain. The relief from withdrawal symptoms could also be a mediating factor that explains the controversial findings inversely associating dietary sodium intake with migraine history. Moreover, the withdrawal of retained sodium and edema related to the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may elucidate a potential mechanism in medication overuse headache. Further research is needed to investigate the pain experienced from sodium chloride withdrawal in migraine headache.
Propidium monoazide (PMA) is a DNA-intercalating agent used to selectively detect DNA from viable cells by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Here, we report that high concentrations (>5%) of sodium chloride (NaCl) prevents PMA from inhibiting DNA amplification from dead cells. Moreover, Halobacterium salinarum was unable to maintain cell integrity in solutions containing less than 15% NaCl, indicating that extreme halophilic microorganisms may not resist the concentration range in which PMA fully acts. We conclude that NaCl, but not pH, directly affects the efficiency of PMA treatment, limiting its use for cell viability assessment of halophiles and in hypersaline samples.
A young woman was referred for nephrologic evaluation of hypertension and a curious desire for table salt. Suspicion of iron-deficiency anemia arose only after it was determined that sodium balance was achievable during supervised sodium restriction. This salt craving abated within 2 weeks of initiation of iron replacement therapy. Although pica is a common manifestation of iron deficiency, this appears to be the first reported case of salt pica secondary to iron deficiency.
A supplemental table of sodium chloride equivalents and freezing-point depressions at various concentration for 29 substances in aqueous solution is presented. Also listed is the isosmotic concentration of each material that can form such a solution. The degree of hemolysis of human erythrocytes was determined in 12 different isosmotic solutions, and the data are presented to supplement the previously published values. While four isosmotic solutions prevented hemolysis, eight other did not.
Experimental data on the mean activity coefficient of CaCl(2) in NaCl-CaCl(2) mixtures at ionic strengths below 1 m have been used to prepare a table of activity coefficients for Ca(++) in solutions of physiological interest. The establishment of an empirical calcium ion activity scale is discussed, and a number of possible assumptions are examined. The assumption gamma++ = (gamma+/-)(2) is suggested as being the simplest with a theoretical basis.
The adhesion on polystyrene of glutaraldehyde-fixed human red blood cells was found to increase with NaCl concentration. Half of the maximum of irreversible adhesion was obtained in 2.2 mM NaCl for neuraminidase-treated cells and in 5.5 mM NaCl for the untreated cells.
Recent evidence showed that in response to elevated sodium dietary intakes, many body tissues retain Na(+) ions for long periods of time and can reach concentrations up to 200 mM. This could modulate the immune system and be responsible for several diseases. However, studies brought contrasted results and the effects of external sodium on human dendritic cell (DC) responses to danger signals remain largely unknown. Considering their central role in triggering T cell response, we tested how NaCl-enriched medium influences human DCs properties. We found that DCs submitted to high extracellular Na(+) concentrations up to 200 mM remain viable and maintain the expression of specific DC markers, however, their maturation, chemotaxis toward CCL19, production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and ROS in response to LPS were also partially inhibited. In line with these results, the T-cell allostimulatory capacity of DCs was also inhibited. Finally, our data indicate that high NaCl concentrations triggered the phosphorylation of SGK1 and ERK1/2 kinases. These results raised the possibility that the previously reported pro-inflammatory effects of high NaCl concentrations on T cells might be counterbalanced by a downregulation of DC activation.
