AIM: We conducted a meta-analysis to evaluate the safety and efficacy of mirabegron (50 mg) and solifenacin (5 mg) monotherapy for overactive bladder (OAB) during a 12-week cycle. METHODS: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of mirabegron and solifenacin for OAB were searched systematically by using MEDLINE, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Controlled Trials Register. The reference lists of retrieved studies were also perused. RESULTS: Five RCTs which compared solifenacin with mirabegron were studied. Mirabegron achieved the same effect as solifenacin in treating OAB. The mean number of incontinence episodes per 24 h (P = 0.20), mean number of micturitions per 24 h (P = 0.11), mean number of urgency episodes per 24 h (P = 0.23), and mean volume voided per micturition (P = 0.05) suggested that mirabegron and solifenacin had no significant differences in terms of OAB treatment. With regard to drug-related treatment-emergent adverse events (DR-TEAEs) and dry mouth, mirabegron showed better tolerance than solifenacin. Post-voiding residual volume showed a distinct difference in the two groups. Hypertension and tachycardia did not show a significant difference between the two groups, but the pulse rate did. CONCLUSION: The therapeutic effect of mirabegron is similar to that of solifenacin, and mirabegron does not increase the risk of adverse events (AEs).
BACKGROUND: Solifenacin is an anticholinergic that is used to treat overactive bladder syndrome (OAB) in children. It is important to ascertain the safety and tolerability of solifenacin in the paediatric population as solifenacin offers an alternative, is more bladder specific, and should have less anticholinergic side effects than other therapies. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to systematically evaluate the safety and tolerability of solifenacin in children and adolescents with OAB. STUDY DESIGN: We included studies that reported the safety and tolerability of solifenacin in children and adolescents. All study types were included. Electronic searches were conducted in Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid Embase, TRIP, CINAHL and ICTRP on the 18th of January 2022. Risk of bias was assessed with the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool 2.0 (ROB-2) for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and the Newcastle-Ottowa scale for cohort studies. RESULTS: A total of twelve studies including two RCTs were included in this review. Results from the meta-analysis of RCTs showed the commonest side effects were constipation (RR 3.5, 95%CI 0.9-13.7) and dry mouth (RR 3.1 95%CI 0.2-53). In terms of tolerability, the effect estimate of ceasing solifenacin due to an adverse effect was 2.7 (95%CI 0.8-9.1). Within the cohort studies, out of the 779 patients 21.7% experienced side effects. The most common side effects were constipation (6.8%) and dry mouth/lips (6.0%) and 3.5% of patients ceased solifenacin due to adverse effects. Overall, the certainty of the evidence for side effects and tolerability were very low. DISCUSSION: The reported incidence of side effects is low, and less than reported with oxybutynin use. However, the very low certainty of the evidence means the findings should be interpreted with caution. There is limited reporting of a prolonged QTc interval on ECG. Studies that described this only had an increase of QTc from baseline and not a clinically significant prolonged QTc that resulted in arrhythmias. CONCLUSION: Solifenacin is an alternative anticholinergic for the treatment of OAB in children. However, given the paucity of good quality data on safety and tolerability it should be used cautiously in children with close monitoring for potential side effects.
PURPOSE: We evaluated the long-term safety and efficacy of once daily oral solifenacin suspension in children (5 to less than 12 years old) and adolescents (12 to less than 18 years old) with overactive bladder. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted a 40-week, open label extension of a 12-week double-blind, placebo controlled trial. Outcome measures included incidence and severity of adverse events (primary end point), laboratory variables, vital signs, 12-lead electrocardiogram, post-void residual volume, and change from baseline to end of treatment in mean number of micturitions and incontinence episodes per 24 hours, number of incontinence-free days per 7 days and number of grade 3 or 4 urgency episodes per 24 hours (adolescents only). RESULTS: A total of 119 children and 29 adolescents were enrolled in the study. The incidence of drug related treatment emergent adverse events was 34.7% (children) and 37.9% (adolescents), the most common of which were constipation (11.9%), electrocardiogram QT prolonged (8.5%) and dry mouth (4.2%) in children, and electrocardiogram QT prolonged (13.8%) and nausea (6.9%) in adolescents. Adverse events resulted in 10.2% (children) and 13.8% (adolescents) of participants discontinuing treatment. There were no cases of urinary retention or increases in post-void residual volume and no clinically relevant changes in laboratory variables or vital signs. Two cases of dizziness but no other central nervous system drug related treatment emergent adverse events were reported. Improvements in all efficacy parameters and grade 3 or 4 urgency episodes observed by 3 weeks were further improved and/or maintained during the study. CONCLUSIONS: Once daily solifenacin oral suspension was well tolerated for up to 52 weeks in children 5 to less than 12 years old and adolescents 12 to less than 18 years old diagnosed with overactive bladder, with constipation and electrocardiogram QT prolonged as the most common adverse reactions, respectively. Improvements in efficacy at 3 weeks were sustained during the study.
To observe the efficacy and safety of solifenacin and/or mirabegron as a medical expulsive therapy (MET) in patients with double-J stent-related overactive bladder (OAB) symptoms. A total of 219 patients with double-J stent-related OAB symptoms were prospectively randomized into two groups. One-hundred and nine cases in the combination group accepted mirabegron and solifenacin therapy and 110 cases as control only accepted solifenacin therapy. The lower urinary tract symptoms and overactive bladder questionnaire (OAB-q) health-related quality of life (HRQol) and symptom bother score between two groups were compared at the 1st, 2nd and 4th week ends. All of 219 patients were randomly assigned to two groups, of which 109 patients were included in the combination group and 110 in the solifenacin group. The incidences of LUTS, including urgency, frequent urination, and incontinence episodes, in the 2nd week (44.9% vs. 64.5%, P = 0.028; 48.6% vs. 62.7%, P = 0.036; and 40.4% vs. 56.4%, P = 0.018) and the 4th week (14.7% vs. 30.9%, P = 0.004; 16.5% vs. 33.6%, P = 0.003; and 11.9% vs. 26.4%, P = 0.007) after combination treatment were significantly lower than those in the solifenacin group. The incidence of drug-related adverse events in the solifenacin group was higher than that in the combination group, but there was no statistically significant difference (P > 0.05). In terms of secondary variables, the OAB-q HRQol score in the combination group was statistically superior in comparison with that in the solifenacin group between the second and fourth week (77.9 vs. 76.4, P = 0.020; and 87.9 vs. 85.6, P = 0.001). The OAB-q symptom bother score was higher in the solifenacin group than in the combination group (37.6 vs. 36.4, P = 0.016; and 26.2 vs. 24.8, P = 0.003). Combination therapy of solifenacin and mirabegron demonstrated significant improvements over solifenacin monotherapy in reducing OAB symptoms associated with double-J stents, and providing a higher quality of life without increasing bothersome adverse effects.
PURPOSE: Ureteral stenting is associated with various morbidity and reduced quality of life. We systematically evaluated the efficacy and safety of solifenacin as monotherapy, or combined therapy with tamsulosin versus control or tamsulosin monotherapy in stent-related symptoms (SRSs). MATERIALS AND METHODS: Randomized controlled trials evaluating solifenacin or its combination with tamsulosin for the treatment of SRSs were identified via a comprehensive search of Pubmed, Embase, Ovid, The Cochrane Library and relevant sources up to February 2017. Ureteral stent symptom questionnaire (USSQ) and drug-related complications were pooled for meta-analysis. Mean difference and risk difference were calculated as appropriate for each outcome to determine the cumulative effect size. RESULTS: There were 10 studies involving 1786 participants finally eligible in the quantitative analysis. Solifenacin monotherapy significantly reduced the total score of USSQ [MD -14.90; 95% CI (-25.19, -4.60); P = 0.005], as well as indexes of urinary symptoms, body pain, general health, sexual performance, and hematuria (P = 0.02, P = 0.009, P = 0.004, P = 0.02, P = 0.02, respectively), but the differences were insignificant when compared with tamsulosin except improved sexual performance (P = 0.004). Combined therapy of solifenacin and tamsulosin showed no beneficial effects in all indexes of USSQ over solifenacin monotherapy. Only slightly higher incidence of dry mouth (P = 0.02) was found with solifenacin versus control. CONCLUSIONS: The result demonstrates the safety and efficacy of solifenacin in reducing SRSs, but no significant advantage was found over tamsulosin. In addition, combination of solifenacin and tamsulosin did not show beneficial effects over solifenacin monotherapy. More high quality trials are warranted to further address this issue, however.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of gabapentin in comparison to solifenacin succinate and placebo for the treatment of adult patients with overactive bladder (OAB). METHOD: A 12-week, randomized, double-blind, double dummy placebo-controlled, clinical trial was conducted between October 2010 and August 2014 at a tertiary medical center. Eligible and consenting patients included were randomized into three treatment groups (placebo, gabapentin and solifenacin). After a 12-week treatment period, an intention to treat analysis was applied to assess between group differences on the micturitions and urgency episodes per 24 h; which were evaluated by 3-day micturition diary mean change from baseline to post treatment. Health related quality of life (HRQOL) domains were likewise assessed by OAB questionnaire (OAB-q). Adverse event were monitored and summarized. Study results were analyzed at statistical significance of 0.05. (ClinicalTrials.gov ID NCT01486706) RESULT: A total of 94 participants were included for end-study efficacy and safety analysis. Compared to placebo, gabapentin and solifenacin have statistically significant improvement in mean number of micturitions per 24 h (adjusted mean difference [AMD] -1.179, 95%CI -1.98, -0.38; P < 0.001; -1.706, 95%CI -2.52, -0.09; P < 0.001; respectively), and in mean number of urgency episodes per 24 h (AMD -0.903, 95%CI -1.44, -0.37; P < 0.001; -0.896, 95%CI -1.44, -0.35; P < 0.001). Gabapentin also demonstrated significant improvement over the solifenacin in the mean number of nocturia episodes/24 h (AMD -0.607, 95%CI -1.04, -0.18; P < 0.001). Adverse event related to gabapentin treatment was lesser than solifenacin, and comparable to placebo. CONCLUSION: Gabapentin treatment with acceptable safety profile, improves OAB symptoms and HRQOL domains.
PURPOSE: We investigated the efficacy and safety of high-dose vitamin D supplementation (VDS) plus standard urotherapy (SU) in managing overactive bladder dry in children. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A 3-arm, randomized clinical trial was performed at an academic center in China between January 2023 and June 2023. Eligible patients (n=303) were randomized to receive 8 weeks of high-dose VDS (vitamin D3 drops encapsulated as soft capsules, 2400 IU/d) plus SU (VDS + SU group; n=100), solifenacin (5-10 mg/d) plus SU (SOL + SU group; n=102), or SU alone (SU group; n=101). Reduction in voiding frequency was the primary outcome. Secondary outcomes encompassed improvement in urgency, nocturia, quality of life score, pediatric lower urinary tract symptom score, and participant satisfaction. Treatment-emergent adverse events were recorded within each group. RESULTS: Participants had a median age of 82.0 months and their baseline mean vitamin D level was 22.64 ng/mL. The VDS + SU group showed greater improvements in voids/d than the SOL + SU group (median difference 3.0; 95% CI, 2.0 to 3.5; P < .001) and the SU group (median difference 4.0; 95% CI, 3.0 to 5.0; P < .001) after intervention. The VDS + SU group also showed the greatest improvement in quality of life and pediatric lower urinary tract symptom scores. Patient satisfaction was similar between the SOL + SU and SU groups. The VDS + SU group did not exhibit a heightened risk of treatment-emergent adverse events compared to the other groups. CONCLUSIONS: High-dose VDS plus SU was effective and well-tolerated in managing overactive bladder dry in children, suggesting its potential as a novel therapeutic option for this population.
OBJECTIVE: We evaluated a combination of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) and solifenacin succinate versus solifenacin alone in the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB). METHODS: Ninety-seven female outpatients with OAB were screened for this double-blind randomized controlled study. Eighty-six patients who met our inclusion criteria were divided randomly into two groups. In group A (43 patients), patients received oral solifenacin and "fake" TENS on the foot; in group B (43 patients), patients received oral solifenacin and effective TENS on the foot. Improvements in OAB symptoms were assessed by Overactive Bladder Symptom Score (OABSS), Overactive Bladder Questionnaire (OAB-q), voiding diaries and urodynamic tests. 70 of 86 patients (36 in group A, 34 in group B) completed the 2 months of treatment and 3 months of follow-up. RESULTS: Statistically, the maximum bladder volume and OAB symptoms of both groups improved significantly after treatment. The improvement in group B was significantly better than that in group A, as indicated by the maximum bladder volume, OAB-q score and voiding diary. Some mild adverse effects were observed, including dry mouth, stomach upset, constipation, muscle pain and local paresthesia. CONCLUSION: The combination of TENS and solifenacin was more effective in improving OAB symptoms than solifenacin alone.
AIMS: To compare efficacy and tolerability of solifenacin 5 mg/day versus other oral antimuscarinic agents for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB). METHODS: Literature searches of MEDLINE, Embase, and the Cochrane Library were undertaken to identify randomized controlled trials in OAB (2000-2015) for antimuscarinic agents. A network meta-analysis (NMA) was performed to estimate efficacy and tolerability outcomes for solifenacin 5 mg/day relative to other antimuscarinics. RESULTS: The NMA included 53 eligible trials (published, n = 48; unpublished on search date, n = 5). Solifenacin 5 mg/day was significantly more effective than tolterodine 4 mg/day for reducing incontinence and urgency urinary incontinence (UUI) episodes, but significantly less effective than solifenacin 10 mg/day for micturition; no other statistically significant differences were noted for efficacy. Solifenacin 5 mg/day had a statistically significant lower risk of dry mouth compared with darifenacin 15 mg/day, fesoterodine 8 mg/day, oxybutynin extended-release 10 mg/day, oxybutynin immediate-release (IR) 9-15 mg/day, tolterodine IR 4 mg/day, propiverine 20 mg/day, and solifenacin 10 mg/day. There were no significant differences between solifenacin 5 mg/day and other antimuscarinics for risk of blurred vision, or for 11 of 17 active comparators for risk of constipation. CONCLUSIONS: This NMA suggests that the efficacy of solifenacin 5 mg/day is at least similar to other common antimuscarinics across the spectrum of OAB symptoms analyzed, and is more effective than tolterodine 4 mg/day in reducing incontinence and UUI episodes. Solifenacin 5 mg/day has a lower risk of dry mouth compared with several agents.
BACKGROUND: Neurogenic dysfunction of the lower urinary tract is one of the challenging diseases with high burdens in urology. Our study aims to evaluate the efficacy of a 4-week treatment with Solifenacin and Trospium chloride and assess their safety and impact on quality of life. METHODS: Following the selection of 206 stroke patients from two centers who met specific eligibility criteria, including a clinical diagnosis of stroke, normal cognitive function, and the presence of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), participants were randomly assigned to receive oral Solifenacin, Trospium chloride, or a placebo. Under the supervision of the Ethics Committee, the baseline characteristics, compliance with medication, and outcomes were monitored, gathered, and analyzed. RESULTS: The majority of participants were male, with a mean age of 67.3, and most had ischemic stroke. The groups had no significant difference in urinary symptoms after stroke. All of the symptoms in the study groups, according to the NBSS questionnaire, were decreased following treatment compared to the baseline (p < 0.05). After treatment, ICIQ-OAB, and ICIQ-LUTS-QOL total scores and bothersome scores decreased significantly compared to baseline (p < 0.001). When compared to the placebo, both Trospium chloride and Solifenacin alleviated symptoms according to the NBSS questionnaire and ICIQ-LUTS-QOL, total ICIQ-OAB, and the total score of ICIQ-OAB-Bothersome. However, the total LUTS-QOL-Bothersome score did not change in the active treatment groups compared to the placebo. While comparing the two drugs, these values were similar except for the total score of LUTS-QOL-Bothersome, ICIQ-OAB, and ICIQ-OAB-Bothersome in favor of the Solifenacin group. Moreover, Solifenacin had fewer side effects compared to Trospium chloride or placebo. CONCLUSION: The study analyzed 206 stroke patients in two international centers and found both drug arms effective in treating overactive bladder. However, inconsistencies were found in efficacy and safety, necessitating further studies with larger populations. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This triple-blind, multicenter, randomized controlled trial was done on 206 stroke patients after getting Ethical Committee approval and registering the project on IRCT (IRCT20160606028304N2).
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to compare the effectiveness and safety of solifenacin succinate tablets alone or combined with local estrogen for overactive bladder treatment in postmenopausal women. METHODS: This multicenter, randomized, open, parallel-controlled clinical trial enrolled 104 women between January 2012 and August 2013. Participants meeting the inclusion criteria were randomized 1:1 to 12 weeks of treatment with group A (solifenacin 5 mg qd + promestriene vaginal capsules intravaginally) or group B (solifenacin 5 mg qd). Before and after 12 weeks of treatment, symptoms (urinary urgency, frequency, and urge incontinence) were analyzed. Our primary outcome was the change from baseline to the end of treatment in the mean number of voids in 24 hours. Quality of life (QoL) was assessed using International Prostate Symptom Score and Overactive Bladder Symptom Score questionnaires and safety according to the incidence of adverse events. The t test or the Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare continuous variables, and the chi(2) test or Fisher's exact test was used to compare categorical variables. RESULTS: The median decreases in the mean number of voids in 24 hours in groups A and B were 5.2. and 4.3, respectively, which were not significantly different. The median decreases in urgency episodes in groups A and B were 2.0 and 2.5, respectively. In addition, the QoL scores significantly changed in both groups (both P < 0.05). The most common adverse event was dry mouth (19.2% in both groups). CONCLUSIONS: Solifenacin with or without local estrogen was effective and safe for overactive bladder treatment in postmenopausal women. The addition of local estrogen improved subjective feelings and QoL.
INTRODUCTION AND HYPOTHESIS: Comparison of the effects of trospium and solifenacin used for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB) on intraocular pressure (IOP) and tear secretion. METHODS: This study was planned as a prospective study and was conducted at a single center between October 2014 and April 2016. OAB patients were included in the study following an ophthalmic examination, IOP measurement with an applanation tonometer, and tear secretion measurement with the Schirmer I test in the ophthalmology outpatient department. The patients were started with trospium 30 mg oral bid or solifenacin 5 mg oral qd. They were then followed up at the 4th and 12th weeks. RESULTS: A total of 225 OAB patients with a mean age of 47.80 (18-75) years were evaluated. The mean age was 47.41 +/- 12.65 years in the trospium group (n = 104) and 48.14 +/- 11.82 years in the solifenacin group (n = 121) with no statistically significant difference. When the two medications were compared, no statistically significant difference was observed at the 4th and 12th weeks in terms of IOP (p = 0.988, p = 0.822) and dry eye (p = 0.764, p = 0.581). CONCLUSIONS: No statistically significant difference was observed between trospium and solifenacin in terms of their effects on IOP and tear secretion in OAB patients. We therefore concluded that the effects of trospium and solifenacin on IOP and tear secretion changes were similar in OAB patients without comorbidities.
PURPOSE: Non-neurogenic overactive bladder (OAB) is a common problem in children. Antimuscarinics have been widely used as first-line medical treatment. However, their frequent side effects necessitate searching for therapeutic alternatives. We aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of the beta 3 agonist, mirabegron. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A randomized controlled trial enrolled child with non-neurogenic OAB refractory to behavioral urotherapy. Patients were randomized to receive either Mirabegron 25/50 mg based on a 40-kg body weight cutoff or solifenacin 5 mg for 12 weeks. Patients were assessed using Dysfunctional Voiding Scoring System questionnaire (DVSS), 3-day voiding diary and uroflowmetry. Vital signs and adverse effects were recorded at baseline and follow-up. The study primary endpoint was >/=50% reduction of the baseline DVSS. RESULTS: Among 128 patients screened, 72 patients (36 in each group) completed the study with a mean age of 9.2+/-2.3 years. Both groups had significant improvement of DVSS and voiding diary (p<0.001) at 12 weeks. In mirabegron group, 94.4% (34/36) had greater than 50% improvement of DVSS compared to 75% (27/36) of solifenacin group (P=0.02). Complete symptom resolution was observed in 22.2% (8/36) patients on mirabegron versus 8.3% (3/36) on solifenacin (P=0.1). Patients on mirabegron had less adverse effects (19.4% vs 47.2%; p=0.01). CONCLUSION: Mirabegron is more effective with fewer adverse effects than solifenacin for treatment of children with OAB. Mirabegron treatment improves daytime symptoms and nocturnal enuresis with less risk of constipation. It may be considered as first-line pharmacotherapy in this patient population.
OBJECTIVE: The present study evaluated the bioequivalence of the test preparation (5 mg generic solifenacin succinate tablet, produced by Jiangsu Deyuan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.) or the reference preparation (5 mg solifenacin succinate tablets with the trade name Vesicare, produced by Astellas Pharma Europe B.V.) in either fasting or postprandial states in healthy Chinese subjects. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The present study was designed as an open-label, randomized, single-center, single-dose, dual-cycle, dual-crossover, fasting/postprandial study. 56 healthy Chinese subjects (28 each in the fasting and postprandial groups) were enrolled. WinNolin software (version 7.0 or above) was used to calculate the pharmacokinetic parameters. RESULTS: In the fasting and postprandial group, pharmacokinetic analysis and bioequivalence analysis were carried out based on the blood concentration-time data. The 90% confidence interval of the geometric mean ratio of C(max), AUC(0-t), and AUC(0-infinity) of the test preparation and the reference preparation were both within the acceptance range of 80.00 - 125.00%. CONCLUSION: A single administration of a 5-mg tablet of either the test preparation, generic solifenacin succinate, or the reference preparation, solifenacin succinate with the brand-name Vesicare, was safe and bioequivalent in healthy Chinese subjects in either fasting or postprandial states according to the criteria of bioequivalence of the State Drug Administration of China.
OBJECTIVE AND HYPOTHESIS: We aimed to investigate the reasons of storage symptoms ( SS) after transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP). The hypothesis was that a positive correlation would be identified between preoperative and postoperative SS in patients with undergoing TURP and starting early solifenacin treatment in patients with high preoperative SS would be reasonable. In addition, we aimed to analyze multiple other risk factors for post-TURP SS. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 160 patients undergoing TURP were prospectively evaluated and divided into two groups according to their OABS. Those with a score of >/=10 points were Group 1 (G1), and those with < 10 points Group 2 (G2). In addition, patients in each group were randomly further divided into two subgroups: those who were started on 5 mg solifenacin succinate in the early postoperative period (G1/G2 A) and those who were not (G1/G2 B). In additions to SS Preop, perop and at the 3rd-month of postoperatively 14 variable were evaluated. The effects of these factors, surgery and the efficacy of an early medical treatment on the postoperative SS were investigated. LUTS were assessed by International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) and SS were assessed by sum of IPSS 2, 4 and 7 questionnaires (Storage, S- IPSS). RESULTS: Preoperative IPSS and S-IPSS were significantly higher in G1 (p< 0.001); there was a significant improvement at IPSS, S-IPSS, QoL score, Qmax, and PVR for all groups after surgery. Only preoperative S-IPSS was found to have significant effect on postoperative SS (p< 0.001). There was a significant difference between G1A and G1B but no significant difference between G2A and G2B in terms of SS at postoperatively. In addition to this, prostatic volume was found smaller than non-symptomatic patients in de novo SS patients. CONCLUSION: TURP provides significant improvement in both storage and voiding symptoms. The predictive value of the preoperative S-IPSS on postop SS is significant. These results suggest that 5 mg solifenacin succinate treatment in the early postoperative period may be beneficial for patients with high preoperative SS and may not be beneficial in others. Small prostatic volume may bode ill for postoperative SS in the patients with de novo SS.
BACKGROUND: The long-term potential of solifenacin and mirabegron combination treatment for patients with overactive bladder (OAB) has not been previously assessed. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of solifenacin succinate 5mg plus mirabegron 50mg tablets (combination treatment) versus solifenacin or mirabegron monotherapy in patients with OAB over 12 mo. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Randomised, double-blind, multicentre, phase 3 trial (SYNERGY II) of patients with "wet" OAB symptoms (urinary frequency and urgency with incontinence) for >/=3 mo. The study was conducted from March 2014 to September 2016; with 1829 patients randomised. The full analysis set was comprised of 1794 patients. OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: The primary objective was safety, measured as treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs). Efficacy was measured as the change from baseline to the end of treatment in the mean number of incontinence episodes/24h and micturitions/24h. RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: The median age was 60 yr (range 19-86 yr) and 1434 patients (80%) were female. Overall, 856 patients (47%) experienced >/=1 TEAE. TEAE frequency was slightly higher in the combination group (596 patients, 49%; mirabegron 126 patients, 41%; solifenacin 134 patients, 44%). Serious TEAEs were reported by 67 patients (3.7%); one was considered possibly treatment-related (mirabegron group, atrial fibrillation). Dry mouth was the most common TEAE (combination 74 patients, 6.1%; solifenacin 18 patients, 5.9%; mirabegron 12 patients, 3.9%). Combination therapy was statistically superior to mirabegron and solifenacin for the number of incontinence episodes (vs mirabegron: adjusted mean difference [AMD] -0.5, 95% confidence interval [CI] -0.7 to -0.2, p<0.001; vs solifenacin: AMD -0.1, 95% CI -0.4 to 0.1, p=0.002) and micturitions (vs mirabegron: AMD -0.5, 95% CI -0.8 to -0.2, p<0.001; vs solifenacin: AMD -0.4, 95% CI -0.7 to -0.1, p=0.004). CONCLUSIONS: Mirabegron and solifenacin combination treatment for OAB symptoms was well tolerated over 12 mo and led to efficacy improvements over each monotherapy. This innovative combination is a treatment option that could become widely used in the clinic. PATIENT SUMMARY: This study looked at the safety and efficacy of a combination of solifenacin succinate 5mg plus mirabegron 50mg tablets over 12 mo in patients with the overactive bladder (OAB) symptoms of increased urination frequency, heightened urgency to urinate, and unintentional passing of urine. We compared this treatment with solifenacin succinate 5mg or mirabegron 50mg alone, and found that the combination treatment was well tolerated by patients and led to greater improvements in symptoms. This novel combination could be an improved treatment option in the clinical setting for patients with OAB. This study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov as NCT02045862.
PURPOSE: VICTOR was a 12-week, double-blind, placebo controlled trial assessing the safety and tolerability of solifenacin plus tamsulosin in men with residual overactive bladder symptoms after tamsulosin monotherapy. Efficacy of solifenacin plus tamsulosin vs placebo plus tamsulosin was also evaluated. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 398 men 45 years old or older were randomized to 12 weeks of solifenacin plus tamsulosin or placebo plus tamsulosin once daily. The study population had 8 or more micturitions per 24 hours and 1 or more urgency episode per 24 hours after taking tamsulosin for 4 or more weeks, a total International Prostate Symptom Score of 13 or greater, a Patient Perception of Bladder Condition score of 3 or greater, a post-void residual of 200 ml or less and a peak flow rate of 5 ml per second or greater. Adverse events were monitored throughout the study. The primary efficacy end point was mean change from baseline to week 12 in micturitions per 24 hours. Secondary measures included mean change in urgency episodes per 24 hours, and changes in Patient Perception of Bladder Condition, Urgency Perception Scale and total International Prostate Symptom Scores. RESULTS: The most frequent adverse events in the solifenacin plus tamsulosin and placebo plus tamsulosin groups were dry mouth (7% and 3%, respectively) and dizziness (3% and 2%, respectively). Of the patients on solifenacin plus tamsulosin 7 (3%) reported retention and 3 required catheterization. No patients on placebo plus tamsulosin reported retention. Patients on solifenacin plus tamsulosin vs placebo plus tamsulosin showed larger reductions in frequency but not of statistical significance (-1.05 vs -0.67, p = 0.135). However, patients on solifenacin plus tamsulosin vs placebo plus tamsulosin did show statistically significant reductions in urgency (-2.18 vs -1.10, p <0.001). Patient reported outcome measures showed no significant between group differences. CONCLUSIONS: Solifenacin plus tamsulosin was well tolerated. There was a low incidence of urinary retention requiring catheterization. At week 12 solifenacin plus tamsulosin decreased daily micturitions and urgency episodes. Only urgency reached statistical significance vs placebo plus tamsulosin.
PURPOSE: SNRIs (serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors) like duloxetine are known to have role in the treatment of anxiety disorder and stress urinary incontinence. According to the correlation of anxiety disorder and overactive bladder, this study aimed to evaluate the clinical efficacy and complications of duloxetine (SNRI) as a medication in the treatment of overactive bladder in the female patients. We were interested to know the probable therapeutic effect and side effects of duloxetine in overactive bladder. METHODS AND MATERIALS: In this single-blinded interventional randomized clinical trial, 60 female patients with idiopathic overactive bladder (hyperreflexia) referred to the urology clinic, were divided into two groups as pilots. The first group were treated by 10mg/daily solifenacin and the second group received 20mg/daily duloxetine. The patients were evaluated by the ICIQ-OAB Questionnaire before and after one-month follow-up period. The intervention primary outcomes were evaluated by the patient's presentation of the frequency, nocturia, urgency, urge urinary incontinence and the drugs side effects as secondary outcomes were checked. Results: Sixty women with confirmed overactive bladder disease were evaluated. Solifenacin and duloxetine had the same effect on the treatment of overactive bladder (p value=0.148). The clinical symptoms were obviously relieved in both groups after treatment. Side effects were insignificantly more common in the solifenacin group (p value>0.05). However, the different frequency of blurred vision in the two groups was statistically significant (p value=0.04). The most common complication in solifenacin and duloxetine group was anxiety. CONCLUSION: The results showed that solifenacin and duloxetine improved overactive bladder symptoms. According to this evaluation, duloxetine can be a suitable alternative option for overactive bladder treatment, due to the acceptable therapeutic effect and side effects.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the potential of solifenacin 5 mg combined with mirabegron 25 or 50 mg to deliver superior efficacy compared with monotherapy, with acceptable tolerability, in the general overactive bladder (OAB) population with urinary incontinence (UI). PATIENTS AND METHODS: After a 4-week placebo run-in, patients aged >/=18 years with wet OAB (urgency, urinary frequency and UI) for >/=3 months who recorded on average >/=8 micturitions/24 h, >/=1 urgency episode/24 h, and >/=3 UI episodes over the 7-day micturition diary, were eligible for randomisation to double-blind treatment [2:2:1:1:1:1 ratio, solifenacin 5 mg + mirabegron 25 mg (combined S5 + M25 group); solifenacin 5 mg + mirabegron 50 mg (combined S5 + M50 group); solifenacin 5 mg; mirabegron 25 mg; mirabegron 50 mg; or placebo for 12 weeks], and 2-weeks' single-blind, placebo run-out. Co-primary efficacy variables were change from baseline to end of treatment (EoT) in the mean number of UI episodes/24 h and micturitions/24 h, assessed using a 7-day electronic micturition diary. Secondary efficacy variables included change from baseline to EoT in the mean volume voided/micturition, change from baseline at weeks 4, 8, 12 and EoT in mean number of UI episodes/24 h, micturitions/24 h, urgency episodes/24 h, urgency UI (UUI) episodes/24 h and nocturia episodes/24 h; the percentage of patients (responders) achieving zero UI episodes/24 h at EoT in the last 7 days prior to each visit, micturition frequency normalisation (<8 episodes/24 h) at weeks 4, 8, 12 and EoT; and the number of UUI episodes and nocturia episodes in the 7-day diary. Safety assessments included incidence and frequency of treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), post-void residual (PVR) urine volume, and changes from baseline in laboratory parameters. RESULTS: Whilst the combined S5 + M50 group was superior to solifenacin 5 mg for UI, with a mean (standard error) adjusted difference of -0.20 (0.12) UI episodes/24 h (95% confidence interval -0.44, 0.04, P = 0.033), there was no statistical superiority vs mirabegron 50 mg [-0.23 (0.12) UI episodes/24 h; P = 0.052]. In secondary analyses, all active treatment groups had greater improvements in UI episodes/24 h vs placebo, with effect sizes for the combined therapy groups (combined S5 + M25 group: -0.70 episodes/24 h; combined S5 + M50 group: -0.65 episodes/24 h) that were substantially higher than those obtained with monotherapy (range -0.37 episodes/24 h for mirabegron 25 mg to -0.45 episodes/24 h for solifenacin 5 mg). For micturitions/24 h, adjusted change from baseline to EoT was greater in the combined therapy groups vs monotherapies (combined S5 + M50 group, nominal P values 0.006 and <0.001 vs solifenacin 5 mg and mirabegron 50 mg, respectively; combined S5 + M25 group, nominal P values 0.040 and 0.001 vs solifenacin 5 mg and mirabegron 25 mg, respectively). All active treatment groups had greater improvements in the mean numbers of micturitions/24 h vs placebo, with effect sizes for the combined therapy groups (combined S5 + M25 group: -0.85 micturitions/24 h; combined S5 + M50 group: -0.95 micturitions/24 h) higher than with mirabegron monotherapy (25 mg: -0.36; 50 mg: -0.39 micturitions/24 h) and solifenacin 5 mg (-0.56 micturitions/24 h). The combined S5 + M50 group was statistically significantly superior to both monotherapies at EoT for UUI episodes, urgency episodes and nocturia, with effect sizes that appeared to be additive. The combined S5 + M25 group was statistically significantly superior to mirabegron 25 mg for the same variables, except for nocturia. In responder analyses at the EoT, odds ratios in favour of both combined therapies vs monotherapies were shown for the proportion of patients with zero UI episodes and those achieving micturition frequency normalisation. There was a slightly increased frequency of TEAEs in the combined therapy groups vs monotherapies and placebo. Most of the TEAEs were mild or moderate in severity. Events indicative of urinary retention were reported slightly more frequently in the combined therapy groups vs monotherapy and placebo. PVR volume was slightly increased in the combined therapy groups vs solifenacin 5 mg, mirabegron monotherapy, and placebo groups. There were slightly higher frequencies of dry mouth, constipation, and dyspepsia in the combined therapy groups vs monotherapies. There were no concerns regarding electrocardiograms and laboratory data. CONCLUSION: In the largest OAB study to date, combined therapy with solifenacin 5 mg + mirabegron 25 mg and solifenacin 5 mg + mirabegron 50 mg provided consistent improvements in efficacy compared with the respective monotherapies across most of the outcome parameters, with effect sizes generally consistent with an additive effect. Although the combined S5 + M50 group did not achieve a statistically significant effect vs mirabegron 50 mg in the primary analysis of one of the co-primary endpoints (change from baseline in mean number of UI episodes/24 h), it approached statistical significance (P = 0.052), and the nominal P values for the other co-primary endpoint (micturitions/24 h) were <0.05. Most effects of combined therapy vs monotherapy were observable by week 4. The clinical relevance of the improvements seen with combined therapy for several objective OAB outcome measures was also supported by the improvements of combined therapy vs monotherapy in the responder analyses.
BACKGROUND: The aetiology of urgency urinary incontinence is a matter of debate. Current treatment options are based on the hypothesis of a neurological disorder of bladder innervation. However, it has also been hypothesised that one main cause is the reduced function of the bladder-holding apparatus, that is, insufficient suspension of the vesico-urethral junction. This study compared the effects of surgical apical vaginal elevation with those of solifenacin on urgency urinary incontinence in women. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Women with mixed and urgency urinary incontinence were randomised to either an established pharmacological arm (10 mg/day solifenacin) or the surgical arm (bilateral uterosacral ligament replacement, cervicosacropexy, CESA; or vaginosacropexy, VASA. Clinical and objective outcomes were assessed at 4 months after each type of intervention. RESULTS: The study was terminated early; 55 patients were operated on and 41 patients received pharmacological treatment. After surgical treatment, 23 patients (42%, 95% confidence intervaI=29-55%) became continent compared to four patients (10%, 95% confidence intervaI=1-19%) during solifenacin treatment. CONCLUSION: Compared to pharmacological treatment, the surgical repair of the apical vaginal end restored urinary continence in significantly more patients.
