Hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation is the key process in hepatic fibrosis (HF) development. Targeted death of HSCs could be effective in the prevention and treatment of HF. Phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein (PEBP)1 can trigger ferroptosis by mediating peroxide production, but how it modulates HSC ferroptosis is not known. We screened natural small molecules that could bind with PEBP1, and investigated the mechanism by which it promotes HSC ferroptosis. The maximum binding energy of berberine with PEBP1 was - 8.51 kcal/mol, indicating that berberine could bind strongly with PEBP1. Berberine binding to PEBP1 could promote HSC ferroptosis via synergy of its actions with those of sorafenib, but it could not induce ferroptosis alone. Combined administration of berberine enhanced the ferroptotic effects of low-dose sorafenib upon HSCs. Herein, we revealed that PEBP1 might be a target that could enhance the effects of sorafenib, which could provide a new therapeutic approach for HF treatment.
BACKGROUND: Immunotherapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors combined with an anti-angiogenic tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKI) has been shown to improve overall survival versus anti-angiogenic therapy alone in advanced solid tumours, but not in hepatocellular carcinoma. Therefore, a clinical study was conducted to compare the efficacy and safety of the anti-PD-1 antibody camrelizumab plus the VEGFR2-targeted TKI rivoceranib (also known as apatinib) versus sorafenib as first-line treatment for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. METHODS: This randomised, open-label, international phase 3 trial (CARES-310) was done at 95 study sites across 13 countries and regions worldwide. Patients with unresectable or metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma who had not previously received any systemic treatment were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive either camrelizumab 200 mg intravenously every 2 weeks plus rivoceranib 250 mg orally once daily or sorafenib 400 mg orally twice daily. Randomisation was done via a centralised interactive response system. The primary endpoints were progression-free survival, as assessed by the blinded independent review committee per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours version 1.1, and overall survival in the intention-to-treat population. Safety was assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of the study drugs. We report the findings from the prespecified primary analysis for progression-free survival and interim analysis for overall survival. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03764293). FINDINGS: Between June 28, 2019, and March 24, 2021, 543 patients were randomly assigned to the camrelizumab-rivoceranib (n=272) or sorafenib (n=271) group. At the primary analysis for progression-free survival (May 10, 2021), median follow-up was 7.8 months (IQR 4.1-10.6). Median progression-free survival was significantly improved with camrelizumab-rivoceranib versus sorafenib (5.6 months [95% CI 5.5-6.3] vs 3.7 months [2.8-3.7]; hazard ratio [HR] 0.52 [95% CI 0.41-0.65]; one-sided p<0.0001). At the interim analysis for overall survival (Feb 8, 2022), median follow-up was 14.5 months (IQR 9.1-18.7). Median overall survival was significantly extended with camrelizumab-rivoceranib versus sorafenib (22.1 months [95% CI 19.1-27.2] vs 15.2 months [13.0-18.5]; HR 0.62 [95% CI 0.49-0.80]; one-sided p<0.0001). The most common grade 3 or 4 treatment-related adverse events were hypertension (102 [38%] of 272 patients in the camrelizumab-rivoceranib group vs 40 [15%] of 269 patients in the sorafenib group), palmar-plantar erythrodysaesthesia syndrome (33 [12%] vs 41 [15%]), increased aspartate aminotransferase (45 [17%] vs 14 [5%]), and increased alanine aminotransferase (35 [13%] vs eight [3%]). Treatment-related serious adverse events were reported in 66 (24%) patients in the camrelizumab-rivoceranib group and 16 (6%) in the sorafenib group. Treatment-related death occurred in two patients: one patient in the camrelizumab-rivoceranib group (ie, multiple organ dysfunction syndrome) and one patient in the sorafenib group (ie, respiratory failure and circulatory collapse). INTERPRETATION: Camrelizumab plus rivoceranib showed a statistically significant and clinically meaningful benefit in progression-free survival and overall survival compared with sorafenib for patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma, presenting as a new and effective first-line treatment option for this population. FUNDING: Jiangsu Hengrui Pharmaceuticals and Elevar Therapeutics.
Sorafenib is a multikinase inhibitor capable of facilitating apoptosis, mitigating angiogenesis and suppressing tumor cell proliferation. In late-stage hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), sorafenib is currently an effective first-line therapy. Unfortunately, the development of drug resistance to sorafenib is becoming increasingly common. This study aims to identify factors contributing to resistance and ways to mitigate resistance. Recent studies have shown that epigenetics, transport processes, regulated cell death, and the tumor microenvironment are involved in the development of sorafenib resistance in HCC and subsequent HCC progression. This study summarizes discoveries achieved recently in terms of the principles of sorafenib resistance and outlines approaches suitable for improving therapeutic outcomes for HCC patients.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a poor prognosis, and the efficacy of current therapeutic strategies is extremely limited in advanced diseases. Our previous study reported that protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor epsilon (PTPRE) is a promoting factor in HCC progression. In this study, our objective was to evaluate the treatment effect of PTPRE inhibitors in different HCC preclinical models. Our results indicated that the PTPRE inhibitory compound 63 (Cpd-63) inhibited tumor cell proliferation, migration, and HCC organoid growth. Mechanism research revealed that Cpd-63 could inhibit the expression of MYC and MYC targets by inhibiting the activation of SRC. Additionally, we found that Cpd-63 could improve the response of sorafenib in HCC cells. In conclusion, we demonstrated that the PTPRE inhibitors represented a potential therapeutic agent for HCC management.
BACKGROUND: Desmoid tumors (also referred to as aggressive fibromatosis) are connective tissue neoplasms that can arise in any anatomical location and infiltrate the mesentery, neurovascular structures, and visceral organs. There is no standard of care. METHODS: In this double-blind, phase 3 trial, we randomly assigned 87 patients with progressive, symptomatic, or recurrent desmoid tumors to receive either sorafenib (400-mg tablet once daily) or matching placebo. Crossover to the sorafenib group was permitted for patients in the placebo group who had disease progression. The primary end point was investigator-assessed progression-free survival; rates of objective response and adverse events were also evaluated. RESULTS: With a median follow-up of 27.2 months, the 2-year progression-free survival rate was 81% (95% confidence interval [CI], 69 to 96) in the sorafenib group and 36% (95% CI, 22 to 57) in the placebo group (hazard ratio for progression or death, 0.13; 95% CI, 0.05 to 0.31; P<0.001). Before crossover, the objective response rate was 33% (95% CI, 20 to 48) in the sorafenib group and 20% (95% CI, 8 to 38) in the placebo group. The median time to an objective response among patients who had a response was 9.6 months (interquartile range, 6.6 to 16.7) in the sorafenib group and 13.3 months (interquartile range, 11.2 to 31.1) in the placebo group. The objective responses are ongoing. Among patients who received sorafenib, the most frequently reported adverse events were grade 1 or 2 events of rash (73%), fatigue (67%), hypertension (55%), and diarrhea (51%). CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with progressive, refractory, or symptomatic desmoid tumors, sorafenib significantly prolonged progression-free survival and induced durable responses. (Funded by the National Cancer Institute and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02066181 .).
Sorafenib (BAY-43-9006), marketed by Bayer as Nexavar(R) (USA), is anticancer drug approved by US-FDA for the treatment of unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma and advanced renal cell carcinoma. Sorafenib inhibited tumor growth and angiogenesis through targeting both the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway and receptor tyrosine kinases. This study presents a comprehensive profile of sorafenib, including detailed nomenclature, formula, elemental analysis, methods of preparation, physico-chemical characteristics, and methods of analysis (including spectroscopic, electrochemical, and chromatographic methods of analysis). Spectroscopic and spectrometric analyses include UV/vis spectroscopy, vibrational spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometry ((1)H and (13)C NMR), and mass spectrometry. Chromatographic methods of analyses include thin layer chromatography and high-performance liquid chromatography. Only few stability indicating methods were found for quantification of sorafenib after exposing tablet dosage form to various stress conditions such as hydrolysis, oxidation, thermal stress, photo and UV light. However, none of these described methods were made to separate and quantify the degradation products. Pharmacology studies including pharmacodynamics, mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics and drug-drug interactions were also presented. An appropriate table and figures were attached to each of the above mentioned sections along with total of 55 references.
In most cases, sorafenib-resistant HCC cells exhibit significant mesenchymal phenotype and stemness features. In this context, tumor cells might undergo cell fate transition in response to sorafenib or other targeted drugs in the presence or absence of genetic mutations. Therefore, understanding the major characteristics of drug-resistant cells state helps to discover new treatments that overcome drug resistance. To note, little is known about the metabolic or microenvironmental aspects of the certain tumor cell states beyond the genome. This review mainly focuses on the underlying mechanisms of acquired sorafenib resistance based on CSCs and EMT models, which explain tumor heterogeneity and have been considered the major cause of secondary sorafenib resistance. In particular, it discusses how the tumor microenvironment and tumor metabolism regulate cell stemness, mesenchymal state, and sorafenib resistance through epigenetic regulations, and provides reliable targets that might have synergetic effect with sorafenib.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains a major global health burden, and sorafenib, a multi-kinase inhibitor, has shown effectiveness in the treatment of HCC and is considered as the first-line therapy for advanced HCC. However, the response to sorafenib varies among patients, and the development of drug resistance poses a prevalent obstacle. Ferroptosis, a newly characterized form of cell death featured by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation, has emerged as a critical player in the reaction to sorafenib therapy in HCC. The induction of ferroptosis has been shown to augment the anticancer benefits of sorafenib. However, it has also been observed to contribute to sorafenib resistance. This review presents a comprehensive and thorough analysis that elucidates the intricate relationship between ferroptosis and sorafenib over recent years, aiming to formulate effective therapeutic approaches for liver cancer. Based on this exploration, we propose innovative strategies intended to overcome sorafenib resistance via targeted modulation of ferroptosis.
BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is labeled with high mortality and tolerance to chemotherapy. Sorafenib has been the first-line treatment option in HCC patients for past decades, while the therapeutic effect was limited in almost HCC patients. METHODS: In this study, we analyzed public omics data of HCC patients with different responses to Sorafenib treatment. To confirm the role of integrins A5 and B1 (ITGA5 and ITGB1) in Sorafenib resistance, we generated the Sorafenib-resistant (Sor-R) cell lines and cells overexpressing ITGA5 or ITGB1. Hypoxia level was measured using Hypoxy probe by flow cytometry, while vasculogenic mimicry was detected and quantified by CD31 and periodic acid schiff staining. RESULTS: Hypoxia was upregulated in non-responsive patients, accompanied with genes involved in encoding extracellular matrix components and angiogenesis such as ITGA5 and ITGB1. Sor-R hepatoma cell lines were constructed to measure expression and role of candidate genes. ITGA5 and ITGB1 were augmented in Sor-R cells. Upregulation of ITGA5 or ITGB1 reduced the sensitivity to Sorafenib in HepG2 and Huh7 cells, aggravated the hypoxic condition and resulted in formation of vascular mimicry. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggested that hypoxia associated vascular mimicry account for non-response to Sorafenib treatment in HCC patients. ITGA5 and ITGB1 may serve as effective predictors of HCC patients' outcome after Sorafenib treatment, which also provides a new target for HCC patients resistant to Sorafenib.
Sorafenib leads to clinical benefit in a subgroup of patients, whereas all are exposed to potential toxicity. Currently, no predictive biomarkers are available. The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether (11)C-sorafenib and (15)O-H(2)O PET have potential to predict treatment efficacy. Methods: In this prospective exploratory study, 8 patients with advanced solid malignancies and an indication for sorafenib treatment were included. Microdose (11)C-sorafenib and perfusion (15)O-H(2)O dynamic PET scans were performed before and after 2 wk of sorafenib therapy. The main objective was to assess whether tumor (11)C-sorafenib uptake predicts sorafenib concentrations during therapy in corresponding tumor biopsy samples measured with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Secondary objectives included determining the association of (11)C-sorafenib PET findings, perfusion (15)O-H(2)O PET findings, and sorafenib concentrations after therapeutic dosing with response. Results:(11)C-sorafenib PET findings did not predict sorafenib concentrations in tumor biopsy samples during therapy. In addition, sorafenib plasma and tumor concentrations were not associated with clinical outcome in this exploratory study. Higher (11)C-sorafenib accumulation in tumors at baseline and day 14 of treatment showed an association with poorer prognosis and correlated with tumor perfusion (Spearman correlation coefficient = 0.671, P = 0.020). Interestingly, a decrease in tumor perfusion measured with (15)O-H(2)O PET after only 14 d of therapy showed an association with response, with a decrease in tumor perfusion of 56% +/- 23% (mean +/- SD) versus 18% +/- 32% in patients with stable and progressive disease, respectively. Conclusion: Microdose (11)C-sorafenib PET did not predict intratumoral sorafenib concentrations after therapeutic dosing, but the association between a decrease in tumor perfusion and clinical benefit warrants further investigation.
BACKGROUND: Thyroid cancer is a rare cancer, accounting for only 1% of all malignancies in England and Wales. Differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) accounts for  approximately 94% of all thyroid cancers. Patients with DTC often require treatment with radioactive iodine. Treatment for DTC that is refractory to radioactive iodine [radioactive iodine-refractory DTC (RR-DTC)] is often limited to best supportive care (BSC). OBJECTIVES: We aimed to assess the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of lenvatinib (Lenvima((R)); Eisai Ltd, Hertfordshire, UK) and sorafenib (Nexar((R)); Bayer HealthCare, Leverkusen, Germany) for the treatment of patients with RR-DTC. DATA SOURCES: EMBASE, MEDLINE, PubMed, The Cochrane Library and EconLit were searched (date range 1999 to 10 January 2017; searched on 10 January 2017). The bibliographies of retrieved citations were also examined. REVIEW METHODS: We searched for randomised controlled trials (RCTs), systematic reviews, prospective observational studies and economic evaluations of lenvatinib or sorafenib. In the absence of relevant economic evaluations, we constructed a de novo economic model to compare the cost-effectiveness of lenvatinib and sorafenib with that of BSC. RESULTS: Two RCTs were identified: SELECT (Study of [E7080] LEnvatinib in 131I-refractory differentiated Cancer of the Thyroid) and DECISION (StuDy of sorafEnib in loCally advanced or metastatIc patientS with radioactive Iodine-refractory thyrOid caNcer). Lenvatinib and sorafenib were both reported to improve median progression-free survival (PFS) compared with placebo: 18.3 months (lenvatinib) vs. 3.6 months (placebo) and 10.8 months (sorafenib) vs. 5.8 months (placebo). Patient crossover was high (>/= 75%) in both trials, confounding estimates of overall survival (OS). Using OS data adjusted for crossover, trial authors reported a statistically significant improvement in OS for patients treated with lenvatinib compared with those given placebo (SELECT) but not for patients treated with sorafenib compared with those given placebo (DECISION). Both lenvatinib and sorafenib increased the incidence of adverse events (AEs), and dose reductions were required (for > 60% of patients). The results from nine prospective observational studies and 13 systematic reviews of lenvatinib or sorafenib were broadly comparable to those from the RCTs. Health-related quality-of-life (HRQoL) data were collected only in DECISION. We considered the feasibility of comparing lenvatinib with sorafenib via an indirect comparison but concluded that this would not be appropriate because of differences in trial and participant characteristics, risk profiles of the participants in the placebo arms and because the proportional hazard assumption was violated for five of the six survival outcomes available from the trials. In the base-case economic analysis, using list prices only, the cost-effectiveness comparison of lenvatinib versus BSC yields an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gained of  pound65,872, and the comparison of sorafenib versus BSC yields an ICER of  pound85,644 per QALY gained. The deterministic sensitivity analyses show that none of the variations lowered the base-case ICERs to <  pound50,000 per QALY gained. LIMITATIONS: We consider that it is not possible to compare the clinical effectiveness or cost-effectiveness of lenvatinib and sorafenib. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo/BSC, treatment with lenvatinib or sorafenib results in an improvement in PFS, objective tumour response rate and possibly OS, but dose modifications were required to treat AEs. Both treatments exhibit estimated ICERs of >  pound50,000 per QALY gained. Further research should include examination of the effects of lenvatinib, sorafenib and BSC (including HRQoL) for both symptomatic and asymptomatic patients, and the positioning of treatments in the treatment pathway. STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as PROSPERO CRD42017055516. FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment programme.
PURPOSE: Donafenib, a novel multikinase inhibitor and a deuterated sorafenib derivative, has shown efficacy in phase Ia and Ib hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) studies. This study compared the efficacy and safety of donafenib versus sorafenib as first-line therapy for advanced HCC. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This open-label, randomized, parallel-controlled, multicenter phase II-III trial enrolled patients with unresectable or metastatic HCC, a Child-Pugh score </= 7, and no prior systemic therapy from 37 sites across China. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive oral donafenib (0.2 g) or sorafenib (0.4 g) twice daily until intolerable toxicity or disease progression. The primary end point was overall survival (OS), tested for noninferiority and superiority. Efficacy was primarily assessed in the full analysis set (FAS), and safety was assessed in all treated patients. RESULTS: Between March 21, 2016, and April 16, 2018, 668 patients (intention-to-treat) were randomly assigned to donafenib and sorafenib treatment arms; the FAS included 328 and 331 patients, respectively. Median OS was significantly longer with donafenib than sorafenib treatment (FAS; 12.1 v 10.3 months; hazard ratio, 0.831; 95% CI, 0.699 to 0.988; P = .0245); donafenib also exhibited superior OS outcomes versus sorafenib in the intention-to-treat population. The median progression-free survival was 3.7 v 3.6 months (P = .0570). The objective response rate was 4.6% v 2.7% (P = .2448), and the disease control rate was 30.8% v 28.7% (FAS; P = .5532). Drug-related grade >/= 3 adverse events occurred in significantly fewer patients receiving donafenib than sorafenib (125 [38%] v 165 [50%]; P = .0018). CONCLUSION: Donafenib showed superiority over sorafenib in improving OS and has favorable safety and tolerability in Chinese patients with advanced HCC, showing promise as a potential first-line monotherapy for these patients.
BACKGROUND The aim of this work was to systematically compare the differences between sorafenib and lenvatinib for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) from genetic and clinical perspectives. MATERIAL AND METHODS The mRNA and miRNA sequencing information of patients with HCC treated with either sorafenib or lenvatinib was analyzed using differential expression and a protein-protein interaction assay. The clinical manifestations and adverse events of the 2 drugs were also investigated. RESULTS Compared with patients with HCC treated with sorafenib, patients treated with lenvatinib developed 8 differentially expressed genes (DEGs, FGF4, FGF23, UNC13C, RIMBP2, STXBP5L, PHOX2B, NEUROD4, and POU4F2) and 3 miRNAs (DEMs, has-miR-548ah, has-miR-888, and has-miR-196a-1), of which hsa-miR-548 regulated 4 target genes, the largest number among the 3 miRNAs. The functions of these DEMs and DEGs were verified by external experiments in the HCC cell line Hep3B2.1-7. We further investigated the adverse events of the drugs for patients with advanced HCC in clinical treatment. The patients in the sorafenib group developed less frequent symptoms of hypertension and diarrhea. Also, the frequency of hand-foot skin reactions in patients treated with lenvatinib was lower than that of patients treated with sorafenib (P<0.05). There were no significant differences in nausea, fatigue, frequent urination, and dizziness (P>0.05). CONCLUSIONS In a time of increasing interest in chemotherapy drug treatments for patients with HCC, this study provided a better understanding of the clinical evaluations of sorafenib and lenvatinib.
