BACKGROUND: Opioid analgesics are commonly used along with propofol during general anesthesia. Due to the dearth of data on the quality of anesthesia achieved with this combination, the present meta-analysis was carried out. METHODS: Electronic databases were searched for appropriate studies using a suitable search strategy. Randomized clinical trials comparing the combination of remifentanil/sufentanil/alfentanil with propofol with fentanyl and propofol, were included. The outcome measures were as follows: total propofol dose to achieve the desired general anesthesia; time of onset and duration of general anesthesia; depth of general anesthesia; and recovery time (time for eye-opening and time taken for extubation). Risk of bias was assessed and Forest plots were generated for eligible outcomes. The weighted mean difference [95% confidence intervals] was used as the effect estimate. RESULTS: Fourteen studies were included in the systematic review and 13 were included in the metaanalysis. Statistically significant differences were observed for remifentanil in comparison to fentanyl when combined with propofol: Propofol dose (in mg) -76.18 [-94.72, -57.64]; time of onset of anesthesia (min) -0.44 [-0.74, -0.15]; time taken for eye-opening (min) -3.95 [-4.8, -3.1]; and time for extubation (min) -3.53 [-4.37, -2.7]. No significant differences were observed for either sufentanil or alfentanil about the dose of propofol required and due to scanty data, pooling of the data could not be attempted for other outcome measures for either sufentanil or alfentanil. CONCLUSION: To conclude, we found that remifentanil has a statistically significant anesthetic profile than fentanyl when combined with propofol. Scanty evidence for both alfentanil and sufentanil precludes any such confirmation.
INTRODUCTION: The authors discuss a novel patient controlled analgesia system utilizing a preprogrammed device that delivers a small submucosal tablet of sufentanil. AREAS COVERED: This submucosal sufentanil system is not yet commercially available. A literature review of the current patient controlled analgesia systems and current information of this device are discussed. EXPERT OPINION: This novel device has the potential to enhance patient safety as it is preprogrammed and delivers a standard dose of sufentanil, a rapidly acting opioid devoid of active metabolites.
OBJECTIVES: To identify the intranasal (IN) sedatives used to achieve conscious sedation during dental procedures amongst children. METHODS: A literature review was conducted by identifying relevant studies through searches on Medline. Search included IN of midazolam, ketamine, sufentanil, dexmedetomidine, clonidine, haloperidol, and loranzepam. Studies included were conducted amongst individuals below 18 years, published in English, and were not restricted by year. Exclusion criteria were articles that did not focus on pediatric dentistry.  RESULTS: Twenty studies were included. The most commonly used sedatives were midazolam, followed by ketamine and sufentanil. Onset of action for IN midazolam was 5-15 minutes (min), however, IN ketamine was faster (mean 5.74 min), while both IN sufentanil (mean 20 min) and IN dexmedetomidine (mean 25 min) were slow in comparison. Midazolam was effective for modifying behavior in mild to moderately anxious children, however, for more invasive or prolonged procedures, stronger sedatives, such as IN ketamine, IN sufentanil were recommended. In addition, ketamine fared better in overall success rate (89%) when compared with IN midazolam (69%). Intranasal dexmedetomidine was only used as pre-medication amongst children. While its' onset of action is longer when compared with IN midazolam, it produced deeper sedation at the time of separation from the parent and at the time of anesthesia induction. CONCLUSION: Intranasal midazolam, ketamine, and sufentanil are effective and safe for conscious sedation, while intranasal midazolam, dexmedetomidine, and sufentanil have proven to be effective premedications.
INTRODUCTION: Sufentanil is a selective micro-opioid agonist, used intravenously and intrathecally for moderate to severe acute pain. Sublingual sufentanil nanotablets have been developed; 15 mcg tablet for a patient-controlled analgesia device and 30-mcg tablet for a single-dose device administered by a healthcare professional. Dosing interval is a minimum of 20 min for a 15 mcg tablet and a treatment duration of up to 72 hours. The single 30-mcg nanotablet dosing interval is 1 hour. Mean plasma elimination half-life is 13 hours and bioavailability 47-57% after the first sublingual sufentanil tablet. AREAS COVERED: This review focuses on the effectiveness, safety, and feasibility of sublingual sufentanil 30-mcg single dose suspended by a healthcare professional for the management of moderate to severe acute pain. A few Phase 4 studies concerning the sublingual sufentanil tablet system containing 15-mcg nanotablets are also reviewed. EXPERT OPINION: Sufentanil sublingual 30-mcg nanotablets provide effective pain relief in various acute moderate to severe pain states. The safety profile of sublingual sufentanil 30 mcg is typical to opioids nausea, vomiting, and sedation being the most common ones. Sublingual sufentanil 30-mcg nanotablet has the potential for efficient moderate to severe pain management in supervised healthcare facilities.
Achieving successful treatment of postoperative pain remains a challenge. Recently, a sufentanil sublingual tablet system has been developed for treatment of moderate-to-severe postoperative pain. The phenylpiperidine sufentanil is a potent analgesic that rapidly crosses the blood-brain barrier and selectively activates central mu-opioid receptors. The system makes use of a hand-held dispenser system, which contains forty 15-mug sufentanil sublingual micro-tablets. The patient can release one tablet at 20-min intervals using a unique radiofrequency adhesive tag, which is wrapped around the patient's thumb. In this review, the authors discuss the pharmacology of sublingual sufentanil with reference to its suitability in the treatment of postoperative pain, the current evidence for the sublingual sufentanil system in postoperative pain treatment, and advantages and limitations of the sublingual system. We conclude that sufentanil is suited for the transmucosal route due to its pharmacokinetic profile, including rapid onset, absence of active metabolites and low tissue accumulation. The efficacy and safety of the sufentanil sublingual tablet system has been shown in over 600 patients in a limited set of studies; further independent studies are required to determine the position of the system among other forms of postoperative pain treatment. We conclude that the sublingual sufentanil tablet system allows effective pain relief, and allows patients to control their own pain relief and early postoperative mobility.
