The clinical efficacy in migraine was compared for oral and subcutaneous sumatriptan and naratriptan. Doses of the two administration forms were chosen as resulting in comparable blood concentrations. Subcutaneous administrations of the drugs were superior for efficacy than the oral forms. This most likely due to a quicker rise in blood concentrations after subcutaneous injections.. In designing new therapies for migraine one should aim at a quick absorption of the drug, which will probably result in an increased efficacy.
Sumatriptan (CAS 103628-46-2, 3-[2-(dimethylamino)ethyl]-N-methyl-1H-indole-5-methanesulphonamide++ +), a substance for treatment of acute migraine attacks, and its main metabolite are investigated by thinlayer chromatography (TLC), ultraviolet spectroscopy, and gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS). The resulting analytical data (correlated hRf-values, UV solvent spectra, remission spectra, GC retention indices, and electron impact (EI) mass spectra) including an extraction procedure and different derivatization methods are presented. Their applicability is described for urine analysis.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Ischemic colitis (IC) is being increasingly recognized, although specific etiological causes are observed in a minority of patients. While several drugs have been associated with IC, most remain anecdotal reports. We recently treated a patient with IC thought to be related to sumatriptan for migraines, and performed a literature review along with a review of the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database to identify additional cases. METHODS: A MEDLINE/PubMed literature review was conducted using standard IC search terms to identify published cases of sumatriptan and other related "triptan" drug causes of IC. In addition, through a Freedom of Information Act request, we reviewed the adverse gastrointestinal events linked to sumatriptan contained in the FAERS database for the 5-year period 12 March 2008-11 March 2013, in order to determine whether unpublished cases might exist. Our case of IC was analyzed using a causality assessment tool initially developed for use in cases of alosetron (a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist)-related IC. RESULTS: Five published reports (containing a total of seven patients) describing sumatriptan-associated IC in the English language literature were found and reviewed. Another four published reports of related 5-HT1 receptor agonists causing IC (razitriptan n = 1 and naratriptan n = 3) were also analyzed. Among spontaneous reports of possible IC contained in the FAERS database for sumatriptan, there were 19 adverse events coded as "ischemic colitis" and another six coded as "intestinal ischemia" over a 5-year period ending March 2013, but clinical details were lacking. Similarly, five reports of possible IC from FAERS were mentioned in an earlier published report from the late 1990s. All of the published case reports of sumatriptan and related drugs were deemed to have the classic clinical findings and all recovered. There was one instance of possible recurrent IC symptoms in one patient re-exposed to sumatriptan, but not in another. We found that the IC scoring system developed for alosetron was applicable in our sumatriptan case. CONCLUSIONS: Among drug-related causes of IC, sumatriptan joins a growing list of agents with literature reports supported by the finding of suspected cases of IC in the FAERS database. However, the true incidence of IC due to sumatriptan, as well as other causes, cannot be accurately determined because of the likelihood of under-reporting. The structured IC scoring system appears to be applicable for drug-related as well as other etiological causes of IC.
BACKGROUND: Dihydroergotamine (DHE) and sumatriptan are contraindicated in patients with cardiovascular disease because of their vasoconstricting properties, which have originally been explored in proximal coronary arteries. Our aim was to investigate DHE and sumatriptan in the proximal and distal coronary artery, middle meningeal artery and saphenous vein. METHODS: Blood vessel segments were mounted in organ baths and concentration response curves for DHE and sumatriptan were constructed. RESULTS: In the proximal coronary artery, meningeal artery and saphenous vein, maximal contractions to DHE (proximal: 8 +/- 4%; meningeal: 32 +/- 7%; saphenous: 52 +/- 11%) and sumatriptan (proximal: 17 +/- 7%; meningeal: 61 +/- 18%, saphenous: 37 +/- 8%) were not significantly different. In the distal coronary artery, contractions to DHE (5 +/- 2%) were significantly smaller than those to sumatriptan (17 +/- 9%). At clinically relevant concentrations, mean contractions to DHE and sumatriptan were below 3% in proximal coronary arteries and below 6% in distal coronary arteries. Contractions in the meningeal artery and saphenous vein were higher (7%-38%). CONCLUSIONS: Contractions to DHE in distal coronary arteries are smaller than those to sumatriptan, while at clinical concentrations they both induce only slight contractions. In meningeal arteries contractions to DHE and sumatriptan are significantly larger, showing their cranioselectivity. Contractions to DHE in the saphenous vein are higher than those in the arteries, confirming its venous contractile properties.
The low bioavailability of the anti-migraine drug sumatriptan is partially caused by first-pass hepatic metabolism. In this study, we analyzed the impact of the hepatic organic cation transporter OCT1 on sumatriptan cellular uptake, and of OCT1 polymorphisms on sumatriptan pharmacokinetics. OCT1 transported sumatriptan with high capacity and sumatriptan uptake into human hepatocytes was strongly inhibited by the OCT1 inhibitor MPP(+) . Sumatriptan uptake was not affected by the Met420del polymorphism, but was strongly reduced by Arg61Cys and Gly401Ser, and completely abolished by Gly465Arg and Cys88Arg. Plasma concentrations in humans with two deficient OCT1 alleles were 215% of those with fully active OCT1 (P = 0.0003). OCT1 also transported naratriptan, rizatriptan, and zolmitriptan, suggesting a possible impact of OCT1 polymorphisms on the pharmacokinetics of other triptans as well. In conclusion, OCT1 is a high-capacity transporter of sumatriptan and polymorphisms causing OCT1 deficiency have similar effects on sumatriptan pharmacokinetics as those observed in subjects with liver impairment.
OBJECTIVES: Sumatriptan is effective in the acute treatment of migraine. However, about 15% of patients with migraine do not experience headache relief after sumatriptan, and up to 40% may experience recurrence of headache within 24 hours. We studied whether pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic differences may explain these different clinical effects. METHODS: We compared the pharmacokinetic profiles of subcutaneous sumatriptan in 14 patients who consistently had headache relief without headache recurrence, in 12 patients who had headache recurrence in every attack, and in six patients who did not have headache relief after sumatriptan. Because the antimigraine action of sumatriptan may be mediated through vasoconstriction of cranial blood vessels, we also compared in these patients changes in blood vessel diameter and blood velocity in the common, internal, and external carotid arteries. RESULTS: Despite sufficient power of the study, no important differences in pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles between the three patient groups were detected. CONCLUSION: Headache recurrence and lack of headache relief after sumatriptan do not appear to be explained by pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic differences between patients, which may be an important finding for the development of novel antimigraine drugs.
A simple and highly sensitive spectrofluorimetric method for the estimation of sumatriptan succinate has been investigated. The suggested method depends on the determination of the intrinsic fluorescence properties of the drug in aqueous systems at lambda(em) 350 nm following lambda(ex) at 225 nm. The linearity range was 10-100 ng/ml, with a detection limit and quantitation limit of 1.2 and 3.6 ng/ml, respectively. The suggested method was sufficiently successful for determination of sumatriptan its pharmaceutical tablets as well as in spiked human plasma. Moreover, the validation parameters were determined following International Council for Harmonisation guidelines. Statistical analysis of the obtained results from the proposed and reference methods showed no significance difference between the two methods regarding accuracy and precision.
Frequency and torment caused by migraines direct patients toward a variety of remedies. Few studies to date have proposed ginger derivates for migraine relief. This study aims to evaluate the efficacy of ginger in the ablation of common migraine attack in comparison to sumatriptan therapy. In this double-blinded randomized clinical trial, 100 patients who had acute migraine without aura were randomly allocated to receive either ginger powder or sumatriptan. Time of headache onset, its severity, time interval from headache beginning to taking drug and patient self-estimation about response for five subsequent migraine attacks were recorded by patients. Patients(,) satisfaction from treatment efficacy and their willingness to continue it was also evaluated after 1 month following intervention. Two hours after using either drug, mean headaches severity decreased significantly. Efficacy of ginger powder and sumatriptan was similar. Clinical adverse effects of ginger powder were less than sumatriptan. Patients' satisfaction and willingness to continue did not differ. The effectiveness of ginger powder in the treatment of common migraine attacks is statistically comparable to sumatriptan. Ginger also poses a better side effect profile than sumatriptan.
A suppository formulation of the 5HT1 agonist sumatriptan could prove an important therapeutic option in migraine patients who dislike or poorly tolerate injectable therapy and where oral tablet administration is unsuitable because of severe migraine-related vomiting. Two independent double-blind, randomized clinical studies were conducted to evaluate the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of sumatriptan suppositories following ascending single doses (four different dose levels) and multiple doses. In the four-period, crossover, single-dose study, 24 healthy male subjects were randomized to receive a suppository containing 12.5, 25, 50, or 100 mg on separate occasions 3-14 days apart. The suppositories were generally well tolerated; transient asthenia, drowsiness, and headache were the most frequently reported adverse events, and these were not dose-related. Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) of sumatriptan were proportional to dose from 25 to 100 mg; area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC infinity) values were proportional to dose except at the highest doses, when they were greater than those predicted from lower doses. For all doses, the tmax of sumatriptan occurred within 2.5 h, and the t1/2 was approximately 2 h. In the two-period, placebo-controlled, crossover, repeat-dose study, 12 healthy adult male subjects were randomized to receive either a 50-mg sumatriptan suppository or placebo suppository, administered rectally twice a day, for 11 doses (5 1/2 days). Adverse events were no more frequent with sumatriptan than with placebo, and stool guaiac, rectal examinations, and physical examinations remained normal. No significant differences were noted between Day 1 and Day 6 values in the AUC, Cmax, time of peak serum concentration (tmax), elimination half-life (t 1/2), fraction of the dose excreted in the urine (fe), or renal clearance (Clr) of sumatriptan or its pharmacologically inactive indole acetic acid metabolite. Serum metabolite concentrations were two to three-fold higher than corresponding sumatriptan concentrations. No clinically significant accumulation of sumatriptan or its metabolite occurred. Overall, these studies show that sumatriptan administration via a suppository formulation is well tolerated, allows rapid absorption of sumatriptan, results in sumatriptan Cmax values that are proportional to dose from 25 to 100 mg, and is not associated with accumulation of sumatriptan or its metabolite.
BACKGROUND: Chemometrics is a discipline that allows the spectral resolution of drugs in a pharmaceutical formulation along with degradation product and it is an alternative to chromatographic methods. OBJECTIVE: Sumatriptan (SUM) is co-formulated with naproxen (NAP) and used in acute migraine attacks. SUM, which has physiological importance, has not been subjected to any stability-indicating chemometric approaches yet, so there is a need for an accurate and safe method for the assay of the cited drug in its preparations. The greenness and blueness assessment was applied using different ecological metrics, including the Green Analytical Procedure Index (GAPI), Analytical Greenness Metric (AGREE), Analytical Eco-Scale (AES) and new "blueness" evaluation using the Blue Applicability Grade Index (BAGI) tool. METHODS: SUM was determined in pharmaceutical formulation along with NAP and in presence of alkali-induced degradation product with simple and cost-effective multivariate approaches using spectrophotometric data. Three chemometric approaches were applied for the stability-indicating determination of SUM in the presence of NAP. Classical least-squares (CLS), partial least-squares regression (PLS), and principal components regression (PCR)-three multivariate calibration numerical models that were applied to the UV spectra of the mixtures-were used to achieve the best resolution. RESULTS: Sumatriptan was analyzed with mean accuracies for PLS (100.29% +/- 1.318) and for PCR (100.60% +/- 1.564). The presented methods were compared and validated for their quantitative analyses. Moreover, statistical comparison between the results obtained by the proposed models and the official methods showed no significant differences. CONCLUSION: The proposed multivariate calibrations were accurate and specific for quantitative analysis of the studied component. PLS is the best method that has the capacity for qualitative analysis of SUM and it is suitable for routine analysis and stability studies of SUM in QC laboratories. Various ecological assessment metrics confirmed the long-standing eco-friendliness of the suggested models. HIGHLIGHTS: Severally overlapped mixtures of SUM along with co-formulated drug NAP and an alkali-induced degradation product were analyzed by three chemometric approaches. The analytical performance of PLS and PCR was compared and validated in terms of root-mean-square error of calibration (RMSEC), SE of prediction, and recoveries. PLS gave the highest predicted concentrations with the lowest RMSEC and root-mean-square error of prediction. The standard addition was applied for accuracy assessment and the results were compared to those of official methods. Proposed models determined SUM in synthetic mixtures and pharmaceutical formulation in QC laboratories and stability studies. Ecological evaluation tools for measuring the environmental friendliness of chemicals were utilized for the first time in the analysis of SUM.
A sensitive and fast liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) method was developed and validated for the simultaneous quantification of naproxen and sumatriptan in human plasma. A simple liquid-liquid extraction procedure, with a mixture of ethyl acetate, methyl tert-butyl ether, and dichloromethane (4:3:3, v/v), was used for the cleanup of plasma. Naratriptan and aceclofenac were employed as internal standards. The analyses were carried out using an ACE C18 column (50 x 4.6 mm i.d.; particle size 5 mum) and a mobile phase consisting of 2 mM aqueous ammonium acetate with 0.025 % formic acid and methanol (38:62, v/v). A triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer equipped with an electrospray source in the positive mode was set up in the selective reaction monitoring mode to detect the ion transitions m/z 231.67 --> m/z 185.07, m/z 296.70 --> m/z 157.30, m/z 354.80 --> m/z 215.00, and m/z 336.80 --> m/z 97.94 for naproxen, sumatriptan, aceclofenac, and naratriptan, respectively. The method was validated and proved to be linear, accurate, precise, and selective over the ranges of 2.5-130 mug mL(-1) for naproxen and 1-50 ng mL(-1) for sumatriptan. The validated method was successfully applied to a pharmacokinetic study with simultaneous administration of naproxen sodium and sumatriptan succinate tablet formulations in healthy volunteers.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy, speed of onset, and adverse events of 6 mg subcutaneous, 100 mg oral, and 20 mg intranasal sumatriptan in the treatment of migraine attacks. DESIGN: Systematic review of placebo-controlled randomized clinical trials. DATA SOURCES: Thirty trials up to April 1997 retrieved from a systematic literature search (Medline, review papers, handsearching of journals, congress proceedings, manufacturer's database); no restriction on language. OUTCOME PARAMETERS: Numbers needed to treat (NNT) were calculated for relief of headache and for adverse events (when data were available). Therapeutic gain was used to evaluate speed of onset of action. RESULTS: Subcutaneous sumatriptan was more efficacious, combined number needed to treat 2.0 at 1 h, than oral (3.0 at 2 h) and intranasal sumatriptan (3.1 at 2 h). For adverse events, the NNT was 3.0 for subcutaneous and 8.3 for oral sumatriptan. Only limited data on adverse events for intranasal sumatriptan were available. Therapeutic gain analysis during the first 2 h showed that subcutaneous sumatriptan was the fastest-acting form of administration. CONCLUSIONS: Subcutaneous sumatriptan in a dose of 6 mg is significantly more efficacious than 100 mg of oral sumatriptan, but causes more adverse events than oral sumatriptan. Subcutaneous sumatriptan is the form with the quickest onset of action. Intranasal sumatriptan has the same efficacy as oral sumatriptan and a quicker onset of action than the oral form, but with a limited therapeutic effect for the first 30 min after administration.
The serotonin agonist sumatriptan was marketed in Denmark in 1992 for the treatment of acute attacks of migraine and cluster headache. The clinical development program of the drug was impressive. However, knowledge of the long-term use of sumatriptan in unselected patients was lacking. Misuse of sumatriptan was reported in single patients shortly after the introduction of the drug. The aim of the present thesis was, therefore, to provide an epidemiological description of sumatriptan use with particular emphasis on overuse. The author conducted three studies, two of which were exclusively based on population-based data from a regional (Odense Pharmacoepidemiological Database) and a national (Registry of Drug Statistics, Danish Medicines Agency) prescription registry. Both registries record patient-specific information, thus enabling the conduct of longitudinal studies of drug use. The regional registry covers the county of Funen (reimbursable prescription drugs only), while the national registry records information on all prescriptions presented in the entire country. Consumption was described by means of the Defined Daily Dose (DDD) unit. One DDD of sumatriptan amounts to 100 mg orally or 6 mg subcutaneously. Subjects were classified as recipients of single or multiple prescriptions. Individuals in the latter category were characterized by the 30-day period with the most intensive dispensing of sumatriptan (peak use): low (less than 30 DDD/30 days), intermediate (30-59 DDD/30 days) and high-peak users (60 or more DDD/30 days). In 1995, 33,206 users of sumatriptan were identified in Denmark, corresponding to a 1-year period prevalence of use of 7.8 per 1,000 inhabitants (only persons aged > or = 16 years were included). A female-to-male ratio of 3.8:1 was found. Use was most common among women aged 35-54 years and was highest among 45 to 49-year-olds for both sexes. The standardized period prevalence of sumatriptan use varied regionally between the Danish counties from 6.4 to 9.6 per 1,000 inhabitants. The period prevalence of sumatriptan use in the county of Funen was highly comparable with that of the entire nation. Among the 43,389 sumatriptan users presenting prescriptions for sumatriptan in Denmark in 1994 and 1995, 507 (1.1%) and 1726 (4.0%) belonged to the high and intermediate-peak-use group, respectively. Patients belonging to these two groups were responsible for 38% of the total consumption of sumatriptan. For patients in the high-peak-use group the median span between first and last prescription was 693 days while the median quantity of sumatriptan purchased was 648 DDD. Highly comparable patterns of long-term intense sumatriptan use were found in the data from the regional registry, which covered the 27-month period after the introduction of the drug (February 1992). The register data were highly suggestive of overuse, but lacked essential information, e.g., the indication for use. A third study was therefore conducted using a combination of register and interview data. During a 14-day period, current users of sumatriptan were recruited through community pharmacies in the county of Funen. Respondents returned a signed consent form, including their unique personal identification number (CPR), allowing us to retrieve patient-specific data from the regional registry. For each respondent, all available relevant prescription data for the period 1992-96 were retrieved. Subjects were classified into high, intermediate, and low-peak-use groups according to register data from the 4-year period. The register data were used to evaluate representativity after anonymizing nonrespondent data. The response rates were 33% (7/21) in the high-peak-use group, 47% (30/64) in the intermediate-peak-use group, and 56% (196/350) in the low-peak-use group. Respondents and nonrespondents in the three groups were comparable with regard to age and use of other drugs. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)
In order to study the effect of zolmitriptan and rizatriptan in oral sumatriptan nonresponders (defined as lack of response in three or more of five attacks), 56 patients were studied in an open trial in a crossover fashion. Both zolmitriptan, 5 mg, and rizatriptan, 10 mg, were effective in the majority of sumatriptan nonresponders. The response to rizatriptan, 10 mg, appeared to be better than to zolmitriptan, 5 mg. Approximately 19% of sumatriptan nonresponders remained nonresponders to both zolmitriptan and rizatriptan.
Migraine headache is a common disorder; patients attending Emergency Departments (ED) for migraine symptoms internationally account for 1-3% of total ED annual attendances. A systematic review was undertaken of reports comparing the effectiveness of metoclopramide intravenously (IV) with that of sumatriptan subcutaneously (SC), in an ED setting, for the immediate relief of migraine and their measurable effects in relieving pain intensity. Findings of two identified comparable reports confirm the individual efficacy of the study drugs in pain relief. However, whilst one report concludes that there is no statistical or significant clinical advantage for one drug over the other, the other report suggests that metoclopramide has a distinct advantage. One study is well structured methodologically, but the other has significant risk of bias. The analysis of the chosen studies demonstrates the need for rigorous study design and robust reporting requirements to obviate this risk. Further studies are required to explore comparable effect. Implications for clinical practice from the report outcomes indicate the individual effectiveness of both study drugs in providing pain relief for migraine in the Emergency setting, but not the comparable efficacy of one drug over the other.
Oral sumatriptan in a dose of 100 mg aborts about 60% of migraine attacks within 2 h, but the headache may recur within 24 h. We investigated: (i) the incidence of headache recurrence after oral sumatriptan (ii) whether a second tablet of sumatriptan at 2 h increases initial efficacy and/or (iii) prevents headache recurrence and (iv) whether a further tablet of sumatriptan treats headache recurrence. In a randomized parallel-group clinical trial, 1246 patients treated one to three migraine attacks (with or without aura), with 100 mg oral sumatriptan. Two hours later they all took a double-blind randomized second table of sumatriptan (group I) or placebo (group II). Patients who initially improved, but then experienced headache recurrence took a further double-blind randomized tablet of sumatriptan or placebo. Proportions of patients who improved from moderate/severe headache to mild/none were similar in groups I and III at 2 h (55 vs 56%) and 4 h (80 vs 77%). Incidences of headache recurrence (moderate/severe-any grade of headache) and median times to headache recurrence were also similar: 22-32% at 16 h in group I and 25-33% at 16.5 h in group II. Sumatriptan was superior to placebo in treating headache recurrence: 74 vs 49% (p = 0.017) in group I and 70 vs 30% (p = 0.0001) in group II. Thus, one-fourth of patients experience headache recurrence at about 16 h after successful treatment of a migraine attack with 100 mg oral sumatriptan. A second tablet of sumatriptan at 2 h does not increase initial efficacy and neither prevents nor delays headache recurrence.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
