The ABCF family protein Msr(A) confers high resistance to macrolides but only low resistance to ketolides in staphylococci. Mutations in conserved functional regions of ClpX as well as deletion of clpX significantly increased Msr(A)-mediated resistance to the ketolide antibiotic telithromycin. ClpX is the chaperone component of the ClpXP two-component proteolytic system. Nevertheless, no changes in resistance were observed in a clpP knockout strain expressing msr(A), demonstrating that ClpX affects Msr(A) independently of ClpP.
The comparative activity of telithromycin (HMR 3647) against 419 human anaerobic isolates was determined by the agar dilution method. At concentrations of </=0.5 microgram/ml, telithromycin was active against Actinomyces israelii, Actinomyces odontolyticus, Bacteroides tectum, Bacteroides ureolyticus, Bacteroides gracilis (now Campylobacter gracilis), Porphyromonas spp. (including Porphyromonas gingivalis and Porphyromonas macacae), Prevotella intermedia, Prevotella heparinolytica, and almost all Peptostreptococcus species. Clostridia showed species and strain variability, often with a biphasic pattern. Fusobacterium species, except Fusobacterium russii, were relatively resistant.
Telithromycin, a ketolide antibiotic used for the treatment of community-acquired respiratory infections, is widely prescribed in primary care practice. Treatment-related adverse events are mainly of gastrointestinal origin and generally mild in intensity. The authors report the first case of telithromycin-induced severe acute interstitial nephritis. Practitioners should be aware of the possibility that telithromycin therapy could result in this form of drug-induced acute renal failure.
We compared the activities of telithromycin, erythromycin, azithromycin, josamycin, penicillin G, amoxicillin, cefpodoxime, and ceftriaxone against invasive and noninvasive non-penicillin-susceptible Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates recovered from children. Of the 186 isolates tested, 89% were positive for erm(B) by PCR. Telithromycin had the lowest MICs, with MICs at which 90% of the isolates tested are inhibited of 0.032 and 0.25 micro g/ml for erythromycin-sensitive and -resistant isolates, respectively.
The new ketolide antibiotic telithromycin (HMR3647) has been examined for inhibitory effects in cells of Streptococcus pneumoniae. The antibiotic caused a proportional decline in cell growth rate and viability with an IC(50) of 15 ng/ml. At a concentration of 7.5 ng/ml, protein synthesis in these cells was reduced by 50%. As seen in other organisms, this compound was also a very effective inhibitor of the formation of the 50S ribosomal subunit in growing cells. Pulse and chase labeling assays defined the reduced rate of 50S synthesis in antibiotic treated cells. At 7.5 ng/ml the rate was reduced to 50% of the control synthesis rate. An IC(50) of 15 ng/ml was found for the effect on this process. 30S ribosomal subunit formation was unaffected by the antibiotic. Inhibition of translation and 50S particle formation are equivalent targets for this antibiotic. The effects of telithromycin in S. pneumoniae are compared with those found in Staphylococcus aureus cells.
The antimicrobial activities of telithromycin (HMR 3647) and seven other antimicrobials against 94 strains of rapidly growing mycobacteria were determined. Telithromycin at a concentration of 1 microg/ml inhibited Mycobacterium peregrinum (100%), Mycobacterium chelonae (80%), Mycobacterium abscessus-Mycobacterium mucogenicum (44.4%), and Mycobacterium fortuitum (2.1%). All or most strains of M. peregrinum, M. fortuitum, and M. mucogenicum were inhibited by 2 microg of quinolones per ml.
A comparative study of the in vitro activities of XRP 2868, a new oral streptogramin, against 266 anaerobic gram-positive clinical isolates using the agar dilution method showed that the XRP 2868 MICs for 95% (254 of 266) of isolates were < or =0.5 microg/ml. XRP 2868 MICs for only two strains, one being Clostridium clostridioforme (MIC, 16 microg/ml) and the other being Clostridium difficile (MIC, 32 microg/ml), were >2 microg/ml. Depending on its pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, XRP 2868 has potential for use against infections with gram-positive anaerobes and deserves further clinical evaluation.
PURPOSE: The pharmacology, mechanisms of resistance, in vitro activity, clinical efficacy, pharmacokinetics, indications, adverse effects, dosage and administration, and place in therapy of telithromycin in the treatment of respiratory infections are reviewed. SUMMARY: Telithromycin is the first ketolide to be approved in the United States for use against common respiratory pathogens. The unique structure of telithromycin allows for enhanced binding to bacterial ribosomal RNA, thereby blocking protein synthesis. Its spectrum of activity includes pathogens implicated in common respiratory infections (Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Mycoplasma pneumonia, and Chlamydia pneumoniae) and multidrug-resistant isolates of pneumococcus. Clinical efficacy has been documented in several multicenter, comparative trials for the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia, acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, acute maxillary sinusitis, and pharyngitis tonsillitis. Although studies have demonstrated that the clinical efficacy of telithromycin is comparable to macrolides, telithromycin is unique in that it provides activity against penicillin- and macrolide-resistant respiratory pathogens. The recommended dosage of telithromycin is 800 mg p.o. once daily. The most common adverse events resulting from telithromycin use include diarrhea, nausea, headache, dizziness, vomiting, loose stools, dysgeusia, and dyspepsia. The drug's adverse-event profile is comparable to that of similar agents. Telithromycin is a strong inhibitor of cytochrome P-450 isoenzyme 3A4; therefore, it can affect the efficacy and toxicity profile of medications that are metabolized by this isoenzyme. CONCLUSION: Telithromycin is a reasonable addition to the current treatment options for upper-respiratory-tract infections. Its use should be restricted to infections caused by penicillin- and macrolide-resistant pathogens.
The activities of telithromycin and levofloxacin against 99 mycoplasma strains were compared to those of several macrolides, ofloxacin, and doxycycline. Telithromycin MICs of </=0.25 microgram/ml were found for all isolates, except for Mycoplasma hominis, while levofloxacin was active at concentrations of </=1 microgram/ml against all species studied.
BACKGROUND: This study aims to explore the antibacterial activity of cethromycin against Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), and its relationship with multilocus sequence typing (MLST), erythromycin ribosomal methylase (erm) genes and macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B (MLSB) phenotypes of S. aureus. RESULTS: The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of cethromycin against 245 S. aureus clinical isolates ranged from 0.03125 to >/= 8 mg/L, with the resistance of 38.8% in 121 methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). This study also found that cethromycin had strong antibacterial activity against S. aureus, with the MIC </= 0.5 mg/L in 55.4% of MRSA and 60.5% of methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (MSSA), respectively. The main MLSTs of 121 MRSA were ST239 and ST59, and the resistance of ST239 isolates to cethromycin was higher than that in ST59 isolates (P = 0.034). The top five MLSTs of 124 MSSA were ST7, ST59, ST398, ST88 and ST120, but there was no difference in the resistance of MSSA to cethromycin between these STs. The resistance of ermA isolates to cethromycin was higher than that of ermB or ermC isolates in MRSA (P = 0.016 and 0.041, respectively), but the resistance of ermB or ermC isolates to cethromycin was higher than that of ermA isolates in MSSA (P = 0.019 and 0.026, respectively). The resistance of constitutive MLSB (cMLSB) phenotype isolates to cethromycin was higher than that of inducible MLSB (iMLSB) phenotype isolates in MRSA (P < 0.001) or MSSA (P = 0.036). The ermA, ermB and ermC genes was mainly found in ST239, ST59 and ST1 isolates in MRSA, respectively. Among the MSSA, the ermC gene was more detected in ST7, ST88 and ST120 isolates, but more ermB genes were detected in ST59 and ST398 isolates. The cMLSB phenotype was more common in ST239 and ST59 isolates of MRSA, and was more frequently detected in ST59, ST398, and ST120 isolates of MSSA. CONCLUSION: Cethromycin had strong antibacterial activity against S. aureus. The resistance of MRSA to cethromycin may had some clonal aggregation in ST239. The resistance of S. aureus carrying various erm genes or MLSB phenotypes to cethromycin was different.
Telithromycin-nonsusceptible pneumococcal clinical isolates (n = 17) were analyzed for their antimicrobial susceptibility, macrolide resistance mechanisms, and genetic relatedness. All strains showed the erm(B) genotype and showed a wide range of combinations of macrolide resistance mechanisms. The predominant clone (n = 7) was serotype 14, sequence type 143.
The susceptibility pattern of Mycobacterium marinum was determined. Quinupristin-dalfopristin and telithromycin were less active than clarithromycin. Linezolid showed good antimicrobial activity at clinically achievable concentrations. Gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, and moxifloxacin displayed activities similar to those of ciprofloxacin. Gemifloxacin was less active. The Etest method showed variable agreement with the reference method.
Telithromycin, the first ketolide antibacterial, was developed for the treatment of community-acquired respiratory tract infections. This multicenter, open-label, uncontrolled study assessed the efficacy and safety of 800 mg, once-daily telithromycin in adults with community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). Based on bacteriologic eradication rates, telithromycin was shown to be effective for the treatment of CAP. Telithromycin was generally well tolerated, with gastro-intestinal adverse events observed most frequently (diarrhea 4/218 [1.8%], nausea 4/218 [1.8%], vomiting 5/218 [2.3%]). These results were consistent with those observed in randomized, active-controlled studies.
Of 595 isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae from outpatients with respiratory tract infections, collected from 17 microbiology laboratories, 14.1% were resistant to erythromycin. Eighty-three erythromycin-resistant isolates were genetically analyzed, 83.1% of which harbored the ermB gene. Only four isolates (4.8%) harbored the mefA gene. Telithromycin exhibited potent activity against all isolates.
By use of a time-kill methodology, the antipneumococcal activity of telithromycin was determined against macrolide-resistant S. pneumoniae isolates having mutations in the 23S rRNA gene and changes in the ribosomal proteins L4 and L22. Telithromycin had MICs ranging between 0.03 and 0.25 microg/ml and was bactericidal against four of seven strains after 24 h at two times the MIC.
The in vitro activity of telithromycin was compared with erythromycin A, azithromycin, clarithromycin, moxifloxacin, gemifloxacin, levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, penicillin G, ampicillin, cefuroxime and ceftriaxone against 336 consecutive strains (83 Streptococcus pneumoniae, 168 Haemophilus influenzae and 85 Moraxella catarrhalis) isolated from patients with community-acquired respiratory tract infections. Telithromycin (MIC(90), 0.008 mg/l) was the most active drug against S. pneumoniae. Telithromycin was also highly active against M. catarrhalis (MIC(90), 0.06 mg/l), but less active against H. influenzae (MIC(90), 4 mg/l).
While most Staphylococcus aureus telithromycin-resistant mutants isolated in this study possessed duplications within rplV (encoding ribosomal protein L22), four isolates possessed insertions within rplV that were identical to a portion of the gene rplB (encoding ribosomal protein L2). This novel type of mutation is the result of an apparent gene conversion-like event.
