Single risk factors, such as hypertension and dyslipidemia, can combine to exacerbate the development and severity of cardiovascular disease. Treatment goals may be more effectively achieved if multiple disease factors are targeted with combination treatment. We enrolled 202 patients who were randomly divided into the following three groups: telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg, telmisartan 80 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg, and telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg. The primary efficacy variables were changes from baseline in mean sitting systolic blood pressure (MSSBP) between telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan 80 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg at 8 weeks, and the percent changes from baseline in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol between telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg at 8 weeks. The secondary efficacy variables were changes in MSSBP, mean sitting diastolic blood pressure (MSDBP), LDL cholesterol and other lipid levels at 4 weeks and 8 weeks, as well as observed adverse events during follow-up. There were no significant differences between the three groups in demographic characteristics and no significant difference among the three groups in terms of baseline characteristics for the validity evaluation variables. The mean overall treatment compliance in the three groups was, respectively, 98.42%, 96.68%, and 98.12%, indicating strong compliance for all patients. The Least-Square (LS) mean (SE) for changes in MSSBP in the two (telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan 80 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg) groups were -19.3 (2.68) mm Hg and -6.69 (2.76) mm Hg. The difference between the two groups was significant (-12.60 (2.77) mm Hg, 95% CI -18.06 to -7.14, P < .0001). The LS Mean for the percent changes from baseline in LDL cholesterol in the two (telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg) groups were -52.45 (3.23) % and 2.68 (3.15) %. The difference between the two groups was significant (-55.13 (3.20) %, 95% CI -61.45 to -48.81, P < .0001). There were no adverse events leading to discontinuation or death. Combined administration of telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg and rosuvastatin 20 mg for the treatment of hypertensive patients with dyslipidemia significantly reduces blood pressure and improves lipid control. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03067688.
Telmisartan is an antagonist of the angiotensin II receptor used in the management of hypertension (alone or in combination with other antihypertensive agents. It belongs to the drug class of angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs). Among drugs of this class, telmisartan shows particular pharmacologic properties, including a longer half-life than any other angiotensin II receptor blockers that bring higher and persistent antihypertensive activity. In hypertensive patients, telmisartan has superior efficacy than other antihypertensive drugs (losartan, valsartan, ramipril, atenolol, and perindopril) in controlling blood pressure, especially towards the end of the dosing interval. Telmisartan has a partial PPARgamma-agonistic effect whilst does not have the safety concerns of full agonists of PPARgamma receptors (thiazolidinediones). Moreover, telmisartan has an agonist activity on PPARalpha and PPARdelta receptors and modulates the adipokine levels. Thus, telmisartan could be considered as a suitable alternative option, with multi-benefit for all components of metabolic syndrome including hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obesity, and hyperlipidemia. This review will highlight the role of telmisartan in metabolic syndrome and the main mechanisms of action of telmisartan are discussed and summarized. Many studies have demonstrated the useful properties of telmisartan in the prevention and improving of metabolic syndrome and this well-tolerated drug can be greatly proposed in the treatment of different components of metabolic syndrome. However, larger and long-duration studies are needed to confirm these findings in long-term observational studies and prospective trials and to determine the optimum dose of telmisartan in metabolic syndrome.
The paper highlights the use of telmisartan, one of the currently available angiotensin receptor blockers, for the treatment of patients with hypertension, metabolic syndrome, and those at high cardiovascular risk. Telmisartan treatment allows blood pressure control, provides organ protection at different stages of the cardiovascular continuum, and reduces the risk of cardiovascular diseases and death. The additional properties and pleiotropic activity of the drug determines its wide range of applications in cardiology.
BACKGROUND: The antihypertensive effects of angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are well recognized. However, conventional meta-analyses have reported inconsistent results on their efficacy and safety. AIM: This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of six ARBs (losartan, valsartan, irbesartan, telmisartan, candesartan, and olmesartan) commonly used to treat hypertension, using a network meta-analysis. METHOD: We retrieved randomized controlled trials on hypertension treatment using ARBs from the PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, CNKI, and Wanfang databases. The efficacy outcomes included absolute changes in office systolic and diastolic blood pressure from baseline, and 24-h ambulatory blood pressure. Safety outcomes were assessed by the total number of adverse events (AEs) during treatment. We conducted the network meta-analysis using the 'bugsnet' and 'gemtc' packages in R. RESULTS: A total of 193 studies were included. Olmesartan had the highest surface under the cumulative ranking in reducing office systolic (91.4%) and diastolic blood pressure (87.2%). Candesartan has the highest ranking in lowering 24 h ambulatory systolic blood pressure (95.4%), while telmisartan reduced 24 h ambulatory diastolic blood pressure (83.4%). Olmesartan also ranked highest in safety (70.8%). CONCLUSION: Valsartan and losartan were less effective in lowering blood pressure than other drugs, with no significant differences. Olmesartan and telmisartan were associated with fewer AEs than losartan, although the incidence of adverse events was similar between the other blockers. Olmesartan and telmisartan demonstrated the best balance of antihypertensive efficacy and minimal adverse events. More research is needed to confirm whether telmisartan and olmesartan are optimal choices for controlling blood pressure in patients.
Telmisartan is an angiotensin-II receptor antagonist (ARB) used in the treatment of hypertension. Generally, angiotensin-II receptor blockers such as telmisartan bind to the angiotensin-II type 1 receptors with high affinity, causing inhibition of the action of angiotensin II on vascular smooth muscle, ultimately leading to a reduction in arterial blood pressure. The present study gives a comprehensive profile of telmisartan, including detailed nomenclature, formulae, elemental analysis, and appearance of the drug are mentioned. The uses and applications and the several methods described for its preparation of the drug are outlined. The profile contains the physicochemical properties including: pKa value, solubility, X-ray powder diffraction, melting point, and methods of analysis (including compendial, electrochemical, spectroscopic, and chromatographic methods of analysis). Developed validated stability-indicating (HPLC and biodiffusion assay methods under accelerated acidic, alkaline, and oxidative conditions, in addition to effect of different types of light, temperature, and pH. Detailed Pharmacology also presented (Pharmacological actions, Therapeutic uses and Dosing, Interactions, and adverse effects and precautions). More than 80 references were given as a proof of the above-mentioned studies.
