Structural properties and rotational dynamics of methyl groups in the most stable form of temazepam were investigated by means of (13)C CP MAS NMR, quasielastic neutron scattering (QENS), and (1)H NMR spin-lattice relaxation methods. The QENS and (1)H NMR studies reveal the inequivalency of methyl groups, delivering their activation parameters. The structural properties of the system were explored in frame of periodic density functional theory (DFT) computations, giving insight into the reorientational barriers and providing understanding of the solid-state NMR results. The theoretical computations are shedding light on the intermolecular interactions along their relation with particular asymmetric structural units.
The effect of pretreatment with a 4-day course of ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily) on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of a single oral dose of temazepam (10 mg) was investigated in 12 healthy young and nine elderly patient volunteers in a crossover design study. Temazepam clearance was lower in the elderly than in the young, but this difference was not statistically significant. Ciprofloxacin had no significant effect on temazepam pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics in either age group.
It has been previously reported that treatment of urinary oxazepam by commercial beta-glucuronidase enzyme preparations, from Escherichia coli, Helix pomatia and Patella vulgata, results in production of nordiazepam (desmethyldiazepam) artefact. In this study, we report that this unusual reductive transformation also occurs in other benzodiazepines with a hydroxyl group at the C3 position such as temazepam and lorazepam. As determined by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis, all three enzyme preparations were found capable of converting urinary temazepam into diazepam following enzymatic incubation and subsequent liquid-liquid extraction procedures. For example, when H. pomatia enzymes were used with incubation conditions of 18 h and 50  degrees C, the percentage conversion, although small, was significant--approximately 1% (0.59-1.54%) in both patient and spiked blank urines. Similarly, using H. pomatia enzyme under these incubation conditions, a reductive transformation of urinary lorazepam into delorazepam (chlordesmethyldiazepam) occurred. These findings have both clinical and forensic implications. Detection of diazepam or delorazepam in biological samples following enzyme treatment should be interpreted with care.
In a one week study of 236 patients, soft gelatine capsules containing 10 mg temazepam (Euhypnos) were evaluated as a hypnotic in general practice. Doses of 10-30 mg were generally well tolerated and performed satisfactorily in 76% of the patients. Seventy-two per cent experienced no hangover effect and 72% rated Euhypnos as good as or better than their previous hypnotic drugs.
This randomised controlled trial was conducted to compare zolpidem to an equivalent dose of temazepam with respect to subjective rebound insomnia after cessation of 4 weeks of treatment in chronic insomnia (zolpidem 10 mg, n=79; temazepam 20 mg, n=84). Both agents improved total sleep time (TST) as well as sleep onset latency (SOL) significantly during the 4 treatment weeks. Prevalence rates for rebound insomnia, defined as a worsening of TST or SOL of more than 40% compared to baseline, were 27% for TST and 53% for SOL in the Zolpidem condition and 26% and 58%, respectively, in the temazepam condition. No significant differences were found between both agents with respect to rebound insomnia, nor with respect to their efficacy or safety. We conclude that in clinical practice zolpidem has no advantages over temazepam with respect to rebound insomnia.
1 The effect of temazepam 15 and 30 mg, flurazepam 15 and 30 mg, quinalbarbitone 100 and 200 mg and placebo were studied in 14 healthy male volunteers according to a Latin-square design. At 14-d intervals subjects received capsules 30 min before bedtime on 2 consecutive nights and were evaluated for objective sleep characteristics, for morning estimates of sleep characteristics, and for cognitive and psychomotive performance and subjective state at 3.5, 10.0 and 22.5 h after ingestion. 2 Changes in sleep induction and sleep maintenance were observed with temazepam 30 mg and flurazepam 30 mg had the greater effect on cognitive performance, whereas quinalbarbitone 20 mg had the greater effect on psychomotive performance. Subjective assessments of alertness were most affected by flurazepam, and by quinalbarbitone 200 mg. 4 The results suggest that temazepam produces less residual effects and is shorter acting than quinalbarbitone and flurazepam.
The present research investigated the separate and interactive effects of the minor tranquilizer, temazepam, and a low dose of alcohol on the amplitude and latency of P300 and on reaction time. Twenty-four participants completed four drug treatments in a repeated measures design. The four drug treatments, organised as a fully repeated 2 x 2 design, included a placebo condition, an alcohol only condition, a temazepam only condition, and an alcohol and temazepam combined condition. Event-related potentials were recorded from midline sites Fz, Cz, and Pz within an oddball paradigm. The results indicated that temazepam, with or without the presence of alcohol, reduced P300 amplitude. Alcohol, on the other hand, with or without the presence of temazepam, affected processing speed and stimulus evaluation as indexed by reaction time and P300 latency. At the low dose levels used in this experiment alcohol and temazepam appear not to interact, which suggests that they affect different aspects of processing in the central nervous system.
Zolpidem is an imidazopyridine hypnotic that is biochemically distinct from classic benzodiazepine agonists in that it may be selective for the BZ1 receptor subtype and shows a different pattern of distribution of binding sites. The present study compared the learning, recall, performance, subject-rated and observer-rated effects of zolpidem, triazolam, and temazepam in 11 healthy humans. Placebo, zolpidem (5, 10, and 20 mg/70 kg), triazolam (0.125, 0.25, and 0.50 mg/70 kg), and temazepam (15, 30, and 60 mg/70 kg) were administered orally in a randomized, double-blind, cross-over design. Zolpidem, triazolam, and temazepam produced orderly dose- and time-related impairment of learning, recall, and performance, and increased subject- and observer-rated estimates of strength of drug effect. The absolute magnitude of these effects at peak effect were comparable across the three compounds. The time to maximal drug effect was faster with zolpidem (0.5-1.0 hours) than with triazolam (1.5-2.0 hours) or temazepam (2-3 hours). These results suggest that despite the somewhat unique benzodiazepine receptor-binding profile of zolpidem, its behavioral and subject-rated effects are similar to those of benzodiazepine hypnotics (i.e., triazolam and temazepam).
Insufficient daytime sleep may result in reduction of effectiveness and safety during overnight military missions. The usefulness of temazepam and zaleplon to optimize afternoon sleep and their effects on performance and alertness during a subsequent night shift were studied. METHOD: In a randomized double-blind within-subjects design, 11 subjects took 20 mg of temazepam, 10 mg of zaleplon, or placebo before a 5:30-10:00 p.m. sleep period. Sleep length and quality were measured. Subjects were kept awake throughout the night while alertness, cognitive performance, and muscle power were repeatedly measured. RESULTS: Temazepam provided significantly longer and qualitatively better sleep than zaleplon or placebo. During the night, sleepiness increased and muscle power was impaired in all conditions. Better sleep was correlated with less sleepiness during the night. CONCLUSION: Temazepam is useful to optimize a 4.5-hour afternoon sleep before overnight missions. Irrespective of hypnotic treatment, sleepiness and fatigue increased during the night shift.
The study compared the effectiveness of temazepam and a mixture of chloral hydrate and hydroxyzine in sedating 20 young children aged 20 to 60 months (mean age 38.7 months). All the children exhibited negative behaviour during a screening visit and required at least two visits for restorative treatment with the use of sedation. The children were assigned randomly to receive either 50 mg/kg of chloral hydrate with 25 mg of hydroxyzine or 0.3 mg/kg of temazepam for the first visit, and the alternate regimen for the second visit, in a double-blind manner. Pulse rate and blood oxygen saturation levels were monitored before, during and after the operative procedures. All the treatment sessions were video-recorded and evaluated independently by three paediatric dentists for the degree of crying, movement, sleep and overall behaviour during specific procedures and at specific time intervals. The results showed no statistically significant differences between the two pharmacologic regimens with regard to crying, movement, sleep and overall behaviour. No significant difference in behaviour was found related to either the order of administration of the drugs or to the sex of the patients. It was concluded that 0.3 mg/kg temazepam and a mixture of 50 mg/kg chloral hydrate with 25 mg hydroxyzine had similar sedative effects on the children receiving dental treatment.
Long-term use of benzodiazepines or benzodiazepine receptor agonists is widespread, although guidelines recommend short-term use. Only few controlled studies have characterized the effect of discontinuation of their chronic use on sleep and quality of life. We studied perceived sleep and quality of life in 92 older (age 55-91 years) outpatients with primary insomnia before and after withdrawal from long-term use of zopiclone, zolpidem or temazepam (BZDA). BZDA was withdrawn during 1 month, during which the participants received psychosocial support and blindly melatonin or placebo. A questionnaire was used to study perceived sleep and quality of life before withdrawal, and 1 month and 6 months later. 89 participants completed the 6-month follow-up. As melatonin did not improve withdrawal, all participants were pooled and then separated based solely on the withdrawal results at 6 months (34 Withdrawers. 55 Nonwithdrawers) for this secondary analysis. At 6 months, the Withdrawers had significantly (P < 0.05) shorter sleep-onset latency and less difficulty in initiating sleep than at baseline and when compared to Nonwithdrawers. Compared to baseline, both Withdrawers and Nonwithdrawers had at 6 months significantly (P < 0.05) less fatigue during the morning and daytime. Stress was alleviated more in Withdrawers than in Nonwithdrawers (P < 0.05). Satisfaction with life and expected health 1 year later improved (P < 0.05) in Withdrawers. In conclusion, sleep disturbances, daytime fatigue and impaired quality of life may resolve within 6 months of BZDA withdrawal. These results encourage withdrawal from chronic use of benzodiazepine-type hypnotics, particularly in older subjects.
This study compared the effects of single nightly doses of flurazepam 30 mg and temazepam 40 mg upon both the subjective assessment of sleep quality and performance on 3 tests of mental efficiency 10 h following medication. 12 male and 12 female non-smoker subjects took part, none of whom experienced sleep difficulties. In comparison with their respective placebos, both hypnotics produced marked and significant improvements in the quality, depth and duration of sleep, and reduced the difficulty that the female subjects experienced in getting to sleep. Flurazepam also produced a significant increase in satisfaction with sleep together with significant reductions in the number of awakenings during the night and the level of clearheadedness on waking. The major test of performance was a continuous 20-min rapid visual information processing task. It was found that for both sexes during each of the two consecutive 10-min periods of performance flurazepam produced highly significant residual impairments in both the speed of reaction and the accuracy of detection, while temazepam had no effect. Overall the results indicate that flurazepam produces a wider range of improvements in sleep quality than temazepam at the cost of less clearheadedness on waking and residual impairments in sustained rapid information processing.
For studies on the excretion of drugs into milk a sensitive high-performance liquid chromatographic assay was developed to quantitate diazepam and nordazepam in the milk and plasma of humans and rabbits in the presence of their major metabolites, oxazepam and temazepam. Flurazepam was used as an internal standard. The assay involves extractions with diethyl ether and an additional acid clean-up step. Chromatographic separation was achieved by a LiChrospher 60 RP-select B (5 microns) column and KH2PO4- acetonitrile (69:31, v/v) adjusted to pH 2.80 as a mobile phase. The same extraction and chromatographic conditions were suited to both types of samples, milk and plasma. The limits of determination using ultraviolet detection at 241 nm was for diazepam 20 ng/ml and for nordazepam 15 ng/ml. The absolute recoveries of diazepam, nordazepam and flurazepam in human milk were 84, 86 and 92% and in human plasma 97, 89 and 94%, respectively. The within- and between-day accuracy and precision for diazepam and nordazepam in milk and plasma at all concentrations tested (20-1500 ng/ml) were better than 8%. The high fat content which occurs in rabbit milk presented no limitation for the extraction of lipophilic diazepam: the method was successfully used to monitor milk and plasma concentrations of diazepam and nordazepam in lactating New Zealand White rabbits during 26-h infusions of diazepam (1.4 mg/h).
Midazolam (15 mg) was compared with temazepam (30 mg) in a randomized, double-blind, parallel group study. An initial screening period was followed by 3 days of placebo baseline, 4 to 12 weeks of nightly oral use of the medication and a 4-day placebo withdrawal period. One hundred seventy-five patients with chronic insomnia participated in this multicenter outpatient study. Because the elimination half-life of midazolam, a new trizolobenzodiazepine hypnotic, is short (1.3-2.2 hr) compared to temazepam's (12-16 hr), more problems with tolerance and rebound insomnia were expected to occur. Hypnotic efficacy (increased total sleep time, decreased wake time, and decreased sleep latency) was demonstrated for both medications over the entire 3-month period without the development of tolerance. In fact, if anything, efficacy increased with time on medication, suggesting possible facilitation or "inverse tolerance" effect. On withdrawal, sleep was improved compared with baseline, suggesting partial resolution of the insomniac condition rather than rebound insomnia. These effects were both statistically and clinically significant for midazolam, with 16% to 50% improvement in sleep measures. The results of this study suggest that patients with chronic insomnia may benefit from 30 to 90 days of treatment. A three-factor model that separates pharmacologic from behavioral and psychologic effects of hypnotics was proposed to explain these results in part.
RATIONALE: The increased prevalence of sleep disturbance in old age is accompanied by a higher prescription rate of hypnotics, predominantly benzodiazepines in the elderly. In young volunteers zopiclone exerts a beneficial effect on sleep continuity without suppression of SWS and REM sleep; psychomotor performance and vigilance seemed to be less impaired than under classical benzoediazepines. OBJECTIVE: The present study investigates the effects of zopiclone on sleep EEG and cognitive performance in comparison to temazepam and placebo in the elderly population. METHODS: Single oral doses of zopiclone (7.5 mg), temazepam (20 mg) and placebo were administered in a randomized double-blind, completely counterbalanced cross-over design to 12 healthy elderly men and women (65.9 +/- 3.6 years, range 60-70 years). On each of the 3 study nights a sleep EEG was registered from 10 p.m. to 6.30 a.m. and cognitive performance tests were applied at 8 p.m., 2 a.m. (when subjects were awake for 30 min), 7 a.m. and 9 a.m. RESULTS: After zopiclone treatment, sleep continuity had significantly improved and sleep stage 4 was increased compared to temazepam and placebo. In addition, both active substances significantly reduced REM density. Neither active compound substantially altered psychomotor and memory performance. CONCLUSIONS: Zopiclone and temazepam can be considered as effective hypnotics in elderly subjects when administered in that dosage. The superiority of zopiclone on sleep architecture may be related to a more specific action of zopiclone at the GABA-A benzodiazepine receptor complex. The suppression of REM density by both compounds and their subtle effects on cognition may reflect a GABAergic mediated reduction of cholinergic neuro-transmission.
A rapid method was developed for the determination of diazepam, desmethyldiazepam, oxazepam, and 3-hydroxydiazepam (temazepam) in human plasma using electron capture gas chromatography. Following a single extraction with benzene from 0.2 ml plasma, diazepam and its metabolites were quantitated on a SP-2250 column with medazepam as internal standard. The method has a sensitivity limit of 4 ng diazepam, oxazepam, and desmethyl-diazepam, and 15 ng 3-hydroxydiazepam per ml of plasma.
1. As changes in core body temperature are generally associated with concomitant changes in sleep propensity, it is possible that the effects of hypnotic/soporific agents may be related to changes in thermoregulation. Therefore, to increase our knowledge of the mechanisms by which these agents exert their soporific effects, we compared the thermoregulatory and soporific effects of temazepam (20 mg per os (p.o.)) with those of melatonin (5 mg p.o.) when administered at 14.00 h to 20 young healthy adults (13 male, 7 female; age, 23.5 +/- 0.4 years). 2. From 08.00 to 20.30 h, subjects lay in bed, and foot and rectal (Tc) temperatures were recorded. Sleep onset latency (SOL) was measured using 20 min multiple sleep latency tests, performed hourly from 11.00 to 20.00 h, during which time heart rate was recorded. 3. Compared with placebo, both melatonin and temazepam significantly reduced Tc (-0.17 +/- 0.02 and -0.15 +/- 0.03 C, respectively) and SOL (by 4.8 +/- 1.49 and 6.5 +/- 1.62 min, respectively). Although both treatments significantly increased heat loss, only melatonin demonstrated cardiac effects. Importantly, there was a temporal relationship between minimum SOL and the maximum rate of decline in Tc for both melatonin (r = 0.48) and temazepam (r = 0.44). 4. A possible role of thermoregulation in sleep initiation is suggested by the similar temporal relationship between Tc and SOL for two different classes of soporific agents.
The effects of 20-mg doses of the short-acting benzodiazepine, temazepam, on sleep, performance and pineal, adrenal and temperature rhythms were investigated in a placebo-controlled, double-blind crossover study. Ten healthy males were studied 4 d prior to flying from Sydney to London via Tokyo and Anchorage (11 time zones). Temazepam or placebo were administered at 2300 hours (local time) during the flight and for 4 d after arrival. After a 7-d recreation break in London, the subjects returned to Sydney via Moscow and Tokyo and again took five doses of temazepam or placebo. During the 5 d following their arrival in London or Sydney, the subjects collected urine, had rectal temperature monitored, performed a battery of performance tests and filled out questionnaires. Temazepam significantly improved various subjective sleep characteristics, particularly on the first few nights. Performance (choice reaction time, critical flicker fusion threshold and pencil and paper tests) was not impaired by temazepam treatment. The pineal rhythm was assessed by urinary 6-sulphatoxymelatonin excretion rate determinations. The time of peak 6-sulphatoxymelatonin excretion (acrophase) occurred progressively later each day after arrival in London and Sydney, however the rate of adjustment of the rhythm was not affected by temazepam. Similarly, the urinary cortisol and temperature rhythms adjusted to the new environments by progressive delay with no drug effect being evident. Administration of temazepam clearly had a beneficial effect on sleep and alertness following transmeridian travel, without detrimental effects on performance. There was no evidence to suggest that temazepam altered the rates of entrainment of physiological rhythms to the new environments.
1 The effects of lormetazepam and camazepam on sleep electroencephalography, visuo-motor coordination, digit symbol substitution and subjective assessments of mood and sleep quality were compared with placebo in six young adult males (18-27 years). The study was double blind. 2 Over the dose range 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 mg, lormetazepam increased total sleep time (P less than 0.05), reduced wakefulness (P less than 0.05) and drowsy sleep (linear effect P less than 0.05). With 2.0 mg there were increases in stage 3 (P less than 0.05) and reduction in rapid eye movement sleep (P less than 0.01). Overnight ingestion of 2.0 mg, was followed by impaired visuo-motor coordination and fewer substitutions with the digit symbol test. 3 The hypnotic effect of 10-20 mg camazepam was limited to reduced awake activity (P less than 0.05), and with 20 mg there were increased substitutions on the digit symbol test. After 40 mg overnight stage 4 sleep was reduced (P less than 0.001) and performance at the digit symbol test was impaired (P less than 0.05 at 9.75 h). Morning ingestion of 20 mg camazepam did not alter performance, and the subjects assessed themselves to be more relaxed. 4 Lormetazepam is not specially indicated for those involved in skilled activity, but may prove useful for patients with insomnia resistant to other drugs. Camazepam would appear to be a promising anxiolytic with minimal effects on performance.
