PURPOSE: Patients with advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) have few treatment options that yield objective responses. Retrospective and small prospective studies suggest that capecitabine and temozolomide are associated with high response rates (RRs) and long progression-free survival (PFS). PATIENTS AND METHODS: E2211 was a multicenter, randomized, phase II trial comparing temozolomide versus capecitabine/temozolomide in patients with advanced low-grade or intermediate-grade pancreatic NETs. Key eligibility criteria included progression within the preceding 12 months and no prior temozolomide, dimethyl-triazeno-imidazole-carboxamide or dacarbazine, capecitabine or fluorouracil. The primary end point was PFS; secondary endpoints were overall survival, RR, safety, and methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT) by immunohistochemistry and promoter methylation. RESULTS: A total of 144 patients were enrolled between April 2013 and March 2016 to temozolomide (n = 72) or capecitabine and temozolomide (n = 72); the primary analysis population included 133 eligible patients. At the scheduled interim analysis in January 2018, the median PFS was 14.4 months for temozolomide versus 22.7 months for capecitabine/temozolomide (hazard ratio = 0.58), which was sufficient to reject the null hypothesis for the primary end point (stratified log-rank P = .022). In the final analysis (May 2021), the median overall survival was 53.8 months for temozolomide and 58.7 months for capecitabine/temozolomide (hazard ratio = 0.82, P = .42). MGMT deficiency was associated with response. CONCLUSION: The combination of capecitabine/temozolomide was associated with a significant improvement in PFS compared with temozolomide alone in patients with advanced pancreatic NETs. The median PFS and RR observed with capecitabine/temozolomide are the highest reported in a randomized study for pancreatic NETs. MGMT deficiency was associated with response, and although routine MGMT testing is not recommended, it can be considered for select patients in need of objective response (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01824875).
Temozolomide (TMZ) is a first-choice alkylating agent inducted as a gold standard therapy for glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and astrocytoma. A majority of patients do not respond to TMZ during the course of their treatment. Activation of DNA repair pathways is the principal mechanism for this phenomenon that detaches TMZ-induced O-6-methylguanine adducts and restores genomic integrity. Current understanding in the domain of oncology adds several other novel mechanisms of resistance such as the involvement of miRNAs, drug efflux transporters, gap junction's activity, the advent of glioma stem cells as well as upregulation of cell survival autophagy. This review describes a multifaceted account of different mechanisms responsible for the intrinsic and acquired TMZ-resistance. Here, we summarize different strategies that intensify the TMZ effect such as MGMT inhibition, development of novel imidazotetrazine analog, and combination therapy; with an aim to incorporate a successful treatment and increased overall survival in GBM patients.
BACKGROUND: Resistance to temozolomide (TMZ) is a major obstacle to preventing glioblastoma (GBM) recurrence after surgery. Although long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) play a variety of roles in GBM, the lncRNAs that regulate TMZ resistance have not yet been clearly elucidated. This study aims to identify lncRNAs that may affect TMZ treatment sensitivity and to explore novel therapeutic strategies to overcome TMZ resistance in GBM. METHODS: LncRNAs associated with TMZ resistance were identified using the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) and Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) datasets. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to determine the expression of PDIA3P1 in TMZ-resistant and TMZ-sensitive GBM cell lines. Both gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies were used to assess the effects of PDIA3P1 on TMZ resistance using in vitro and in vivo assays. Glioma stem cells (GSCs) were used to determine the effect of PDIA3P1 on the GBM subtype. The hypothesis that PDIA3P1 promotes proneural-to-mesenchymal transition (PMT) was established using bioinformatics analysis and functional experiments. RNA pull-down and RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays were performed to examine the interaction between PDIA3P1 and C/EBPbeta. The posttranslational modification mechanism of C/EBPbeta was verified using ubiquitination and coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP) experiments. CompuSyn was leveraged to calculate the combination index (CI), and the antitumor effect of TMZ combined with nefllamapimod (NEF) was validated both in vitro and in vivo. RESULTS: We identified a lncRNA, PDIA3P1, which was upregulated in TMZ-resistant GBM cell lines. Overexpression of PDIA3P1 promoted the acquisition of TMZ resistance, whereas knockdown of PDIA3P1 restored TMZ sensitivity. PDIA3P1 was upregulated in MES-GBM, promoted PMT progression in GSCs, and caused GBMs to be more resistant to TMZ treatment. Mechanistically, PDIA3P1 disrupted the C/EBPbeta-MDM2 complex and stabilized the C/EBPbeta protein by preventing MDM2-mediated ubiquitination. Expression of PDIA3P1 was upregulated in a time- and concentration-dependent manner in response to TMZ treatment, and TMZ-induced upregulation of PDIA3P1 was mediated by the p38alpha-MAPK signaling pathway. NEF is a small molecule drug that specifically targets p38alpha with excellent blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability. NEF blocked TMZ-responsive PDIA3P1 upregulation and produced synergistic effects when combined with TMZ at specific concentrations. The combination of TMZ and NEF exhibited excellent synergistic antitumor effects both in vitro and in vivo. CONCLUSION: PDIA3P1 promotes PMT by stabilizing C/EBPbeta, reducing the sensitivity of GBM cells to TMZ treatment. NEF inhibits TMZ-responsive PDIA3P1 upregulation, and NEF combined with TMZ provides better antitumor effects.
The majority of metastatic colorectal cancers (mCRC) are mismatch repair (MMR) proficient and unresponsive to immunotherapy, whereas MMR-deficient (MMRd) tumors often respond to immune-checkpoint blockade. We previously reported that the treatment of colorectal cancer preclinical models with temozolomide (TMZ) leads to MMR deficiency, increased tumor mutational burden (TMB), and sensitization to immunotherapy. To clinically translate these findings, we designed the ARETHUSA clinical trial whereby O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT)-deficient, MMR-proficient, RAS-mutant mCRC patients received priming therapy with TMZ. Analysis of tissue biopsies and circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) revealed the emergence of a distinct mutational signature and increased TMB after TMZ treatment. Multiple alterations in the nucleotide context favored by the TMZ signature emerged in MMR genes, and the p.T1219I MSH6 variant was detected in ctDNA and tissue of 94% (16/17) of the cases. A subset of patients whose tumors displayed the MSH6 mutation, the TMZ mutational signature, and increased TMB achieved disease stabilization upon pembrolizumab treatment. SIGNIFICANCE: MMR-proficient mCRCs are unresponsive to immunotherapy. We provide the proof of concept that inactivation of MMR genes can be achieved pharmacologically with TMZ and molecularly monitored in the tissue and blood of patients with mCRC. This strategy deserves additional evaluation in mCRC patients whose tumors are no longer responsive to standard-of-care treatments. See related commentary by Willis and Overman, p. 1612. This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 1599.
PURPOSE: The VIT-0910 trial was conducted to evaluate efficacy and safety of the vincristine-irinotecan combination with and without temozolomide (VIT and VI, respectively) in relapsed or refractory rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). METHODS: In this randomized European phase II trial, patients age 0.5-50 years received 21-day cycles combining vincristine (1.5 mg/m(2) once a day on day 1 and day 8) and irinotecan (50 mg/m(2) once a day from day 1 to day 5) with and without temozolomide (125 mg/m(2) once a day from day 1 to day 5 and 150 mg/m(2) once a day from cycle 2), until progression or unacceptable toxicity. The primary end point was objective response rate after two cycles. Secondary end points included best response, progression-free survival, overall survival, and adverse events. A Simon 2-stage design was initially planned to separately analyze 40 patients/arm. After amendment, the trial sample size was increased to 120 and a comparison between arms, adjusted for confounding factors, was added to the statistical plan (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01355445). RESULTS: Overall, 120 patients (60 per arm) were recruited in 37 European centers. The median age was 11 years (range, 0.75-45); 89% of patients had a relapsed RMS. The objective response rate was 44% (24 of 55 evaluable patients) for VIT versus 31% (18 of 58) for VI (adjusted odds ratio, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.22 to 1.12; P = .09). The VIT arm achieved significantly better overall survival (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.55; 95% CI, 0.35 to 0.84; P = .006) compared with VI, with consistent progression-free survival results (adj-hazard ratio, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.46 to 1.01; P = .059). Overall, patients experienced adverse events >/= grade 3 more frequently with VIT than VI (98% v 78%, respectively; P = .009), including a significant excess of hematologic toxicity (81% v 61%; P = .025). CONCLUSION: The addition of temozolomide to VI improved chemotherapy efficacy for patients with relapsed RMS, with manageable increase in toxicity. VIT is considered the new standard treatment in these patients in the European paediatric Soft Tissue Sarcoma Group and will be the control arm in the next randomized trial.
BACKGROUND: Temozolomide (TMZ) treatment efficacy in glioblastoma is determined by various mechanisms such as TMZ efflux, autophagy, base excision repair (BER) pathway, and the level of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT). Here, we reported a novel small-molecular inhibitor (SMI) EPIC-1042 (C20H28N6) with the potential to decrease TMZ efflux and promote PARP1 degradation via autolysosomes in the early stage. METHODS: EPIC-1042 was obtained from receptor-based virtual screening. Co-immunoprecipitation and pull-down assays were applied to verify the blocking effect of EPIC-1042. Western blotting, co-immunoprecipitation, and immunofluorescence were used to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of EPIC-1042. In vivo experiments were performed to verify the efficacy of EPIC-1042 in sensitizing glioblastoma cells to TMZ. RESULTS: EPIC-1042 physically interrupted the interaction of PTRF/Cavin1 and caveolin-1, leading to reduced secretion of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) to decrease TMZ efflux. It also induced PARP1 autophagic degradation via increased p62 expression that more p62 bound to PARP1 and specially promoted PARP1 translocation into autolysosomes for degradation in the early stage. Moreover, EPIC-1042 inhibited autophagy flux at last. The application of EPIC-1042 enhanced TMZ efficacy in glioblastoma in vivo. CONCLUSION: EPIC-1042 reinforced the effect of TMZ by preventing TMZ efflux, inducing PARP1 degradation via autolysosomes to perturb the BER pathway and recruitment of MGMT, and inhibiting autophagy flux in the later stage. Therefore, this study provided a novel therapeutic strategy using the combination of TMZ with EPIC-1042 for glioblastoma treatment.
BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma (GBM) is refractory to current treatment modalities while side effects of treatments result in neurotoxicity and cognitive impairment. Here we test the hypothesis that inhibiting CDK7 or CDK9 would effectively combat GBM with reduced neurotoxicity. METHODS: We examined the effect of a CDK7 inhibitor, THZ1, and multiple CDK9 inhibitors (SNS032, AZD4573, NVP2, and JSH150) on GBM cell lines, patient-derived temozolomide (TMZ)-resistant and responsive primary tumor cells and glioma stem cells (GSCs). Biochemical changes were assessed by western blotting, immunofluorescence, multispectral imaging, and RT-PCR. In vivo, efficacy was assessed in orthotopic and subcutaneous xenograft models. RESULTS: CDK7 and CDK9 inhibitors suppressed the viability of TMZ-responsive and resistant GBM cells and GSCs at low nanomolar concentrations, with limited cytotoxic effects in vivo. The inhibitors abrogated RNA Pol II and p70S6K phosphorylation and nascent protein synthesis. Furthermore, the self-renewal of GSCs was significantly reduced with a corresponding reduction in Sox2 and Sox9 levels. Analysis of TCGA data showed increased expression of CDK7, CDK9, SOX2, SOX9, and RPS6KB1 in GBM; supporting this, multispectral imaging of a TMA revealed increased levels of CDK9, Sox2, Sox9, phospho-S6, and phospho-p70S6K in GBM compared to normal brains. RNA-Seq results suggested that inhibitors suppressed tumor-promoting genes while inducing tumor-suppressive genes. Furthermore, the studies conducted on subcutaneous and orthotopic GBM tumor xenograft models showed that administration of CDK9 inhibitors markedly suppressed tumor growth in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that CDK7 and CDK9 targeted therapies may be effective against TMZ-sensitive and resistant GBM.
Temozolomide is an oral chemotherapy used to treat aggressive pituitary tumours since 2006. It is inexpensive and well tolerated, the main side effects are fatigue, nausea and cytopenia. Overall the studies demonstrate approximately 70% response rate for temozolomide, if response is defined radiologically as complete, partial response or stable disease. Using the more stringent criteria of complete or partial response, the success rate is near 40%. Functioning tumours respond more frequently than non-functioning tumours. Tumours which are depleted of methyl guanine methyltransferase (MGMT), as assessed by immunohistochemistry, also are more likely to respond. Temozolomide has an established role in treating pituitary tumours which have demonstrated metastases or which are refractory and progressing, despite all conventional treatment (so-called salvage treatment). The challenge is to offer temozolomide earlier in the pathway if appropriate. Tumours which demonstrate aggressive clinical behaviour (defined as clinically relevant growth despite optimal treatment) should be considered for temozolomide. One common situation when this might occur is tumour progression after surgery and radiotherapy. It is unnecessary to wait until salvage treatment is required. Anticipated (but not yet demonstrated) aggressive behaviour can be regarded as a potential indication for temozolomide, but there is currently insufficient evidence to recommend this. Ideally a trial should assess this potential indication. Early treatment could be considered in selected cases when high levels of proliferation and invasion were demonstrated, causing significant clinical concern.
Temozolomide (TMZ) has been used as standard-of-care for glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), but the resistance to TMZ develops quickly and frequently. Thus, more studies are needed to elucidate the resistance mechanisms. In the current study, we investigated the relationship among the three important phenotypes, namely TMZ-resistance, cell shape and lipid metabolism, in GBM cells. We first observed the distinct difference in cell shapes between TMZ-sensitive (U87) and resistant (U87R) GBM cells. We then conducted NMR-based lipid metabolomics, which revealed a significant increase in cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis as well as lower lipid unsaturation in U87R cells. Consistent with the lipid changes, U87R cells exhibited significantly lower membrane fluidity. The transcriptomic analysis demonstrated that lipid synthesis pathways through SREBP were upregulated in U87R cells, which was confirmed at the protein level. Fatostatin, an SREBP inhibitor, and other lipid pathway inhibitors (C75, TOFA) exhibited similar or more potent inhibition on U87R cells compared to sensitive U87 cells. The lower lipid unsaturation ratio, membrane fluidity and higher fatostatin sensitivity were all recapitulated in patient-derived TMZ-resistant primary cells. The observed ternary relationship among cell shape, lipid composition, and TMZ-resistance may be applicable to other drug-resistance cases. SREBP and fatostatin are suggested as a promising target-therapeutic agent pair for drug-resistant glioblastoma.
Patients with glioblastoma multiforme and anaplastic astrocytoma are treated with temozolomide. Although it has been demonstrated that temozolomide increases GBM patient survival, it has also been connected to negative immune-related adverse effects. Numerous research investigations have shown that flavonoids have strong antioxidant and chemo-preventive effects. Consequently, it might lessen chemotherapeutic medicines' side effects while also increasing therapeutic effectiveness. The need for creating innovative, secure, and efficient drug carriers for cancer therapy has increased over time. Recent research indicates that exosomes have enormous potential to serve as carriers and cutting-edge drug delivery systems to the target cell. In recent years, researchers have been paying considerable attention to exosomes because of their favorable biodistribution, biocompatibility, and low immunogenicity. In the present review, the mechanistic information of the anti-glioblastoma effects of temozolomide and flavonoids coupled with their exosomal delivery to the targeted cell has been discussed. In addition, we discuss the safety aspects of temozolomide and flavonoids against glioma. The in-depth information of temozolomide and flavonoids action via exosomal delivery can unravel novel strategies to target Glioma.
A glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the most aggressive, infiltrative, and treatment-resistant malignancies of the central nervous system (CNS). The current standard of care for GBMs include maximally safe tumor resection, followed by concurrent adjuvant radiation treatment and chemotherapy with the DNA alkylating agent temozolomide (TMZ), which was approved by the FDA in 2005 based on a marginal increase (~2 months) in overall survival (OS) levels. This treatment approach, while initially successful in containing and treating GBM, almost invariably fails to prevent tumor recurrence. In addition to the limited therapeutic benefit, TMZ also causes debilitating adverse events (AEs) that significantly impact the quality of life of GBM patients. Some of the most common AEs include hematologic (e.g., thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, anemia) and non-hematologic (e.g., nausea, vomiting, constipation, dizziness) toxicities. Recurrent GBMs are often resistant to TMZ and other DNA-damaging agents. Thus, there is an urgent need to devise strategies to potentiate TMZ activity, to overcome drug resistance, and to reduce dose-dependent AEs. Here, we analyze major mechanisms of the TMZ resistance-mediated intracellular signaling activation of DNA repair pathways and the overexpression of drug transporters. We review some of the approaches investigated to counteract these mechanisms of resistance to TMZ, including the use of chemosensitizers and drug delivery strategies to enhance tumoral drug exposure.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive and common primary malignant brain tumor with limited available therapeutic approaches. Despite improvements in therapeutic options for GBM patients, efforts to develop new successful strategies remain as major unmet medical needs. Based on the cytotoxic properties of aporphine compounds, we evaluated the biological effect of 12 compounds obtained through total synthesis of ( +/-)-apomorphine hydrochloride (APO) against GBM cells. The compounds 2,2,2-trifluoro-1-(1-methylene-3,4-dihydroisoquinolin-2(1H)-yl)ethenone (A5) and ( +/-)-1-(10,11-dimethoxy-6a,7-dihydro-4H-dibenzo[de,g]quinolin-6(5H)-yl)ethenone (C1) reduced the viability of GBM cells, with 50% inhibitory concentration ranging from 18 to 48 muM in patient-derived GBM cultures. Our data show that APO, A5 or C1 modulate the expression of DNA damage and apoptotic markers, impair 3D-gliomasphere growth and reduce the expression of stemness markers. Potential activity and protein targets of A5, C1 or APO were predicted in silico based on PASS and SEA software. Dopamine receptors (DRD1 and 5), CYP2B6, CYP2C9 and ABCB1, whose transcripts were differentially expressed in the GBM cells, were among the potential A5 or C1 target proteins. Docking analyses (HQSAR and 3D-QSAR) were performed to characterize possible interactions of ABCB1 and CYP2C9 with the compounds. Notably, A5 or C1 treatment, but not temozolomide (TMZ), reduced significantly the levels of extracellular ATP, suggesting ABCB1 negative regulation, which was correlated with stronger cytotoxicity induced by the combination of TMZ with A5 or C1 on GBM cells. Hence, our data reveal a potential therapeutic application of A5 and C1 as cytotoxic agents against GBM cells and predicted molecular networks that can be further exploited to characterize the pharmacological effects of these isoquinoline-containing substances.
