BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Terazosin, doxazosin, and alfuzosin (Tz/Dz/Az) are alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonists that also bind to and activate a key adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-producing enzyme in glycolysis. It is hypothesized that the increase in energy availability in the brain may slow or prevent neurodegeneration, potentially by reducing the accumulation of alpha-synuclein. Recent work has suggested a potentially neuroprotective effect of the use of Tz/Dz/Az in Parkinson disease in both animal and human studies. We investigated the neuroprotective effects of Tz/Dz/Az in a closely related disease, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). METHODS: We used a new-user active comparator design in the Merative Marketscan database to identify men with no history of DLB who were newly started on Tz/Dz/Az or 2 comparator medications. Our comparator medications were other drugs commonly used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia that do not increase ATP: the alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist tamsulosin or 5alpha-reductase inhibitor (5ARI). We matched the cohorts on propensity scores and duration of follow-up. We followed up the matched cohorts forward to estimate the hazard of developing DLB using Cox proportional hazards regression. RESULTS: Men who were newly started on Tz/Dz/Az had a lower hazard of developing DLB than matched men taking tamsulosin (n = 242,716, 728,256 person-years, hazard ratio [HR] 0.60, 95% CI 0.50-0.71) or 5ARI (n = 130,872, 399,316 person-years, HR 0.73, 95% CI 0.57-0.93). while the hazard in men taking tamsulosin was similar to that of men taking 5ARI (n = 159,596, 482,280 person-years, HR 1.17, 95% CI 0.96-1.42). These results were robust to several sensitivity analyses. DISCUSSION: We find an association in men who are taking Tz/Dz/Az and a lower hazard of DLB compared with similar men taking other medications. When combined with the literature of Tz/Dz/Az on Parkinson disease, our findings suggest that glycolysis-enhancing drugs may be broadly protective in neurodegenerative synucleinopathies. A future randomized trial is required to assess these associations for causality. CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class III evidence that Tz/Dz/Az use reduces the rate of developing DLB in adult men.
The phenomenon of polymorphism is prevalent in pharmaceuticals, yet it is unusual to identify more than three or four forms for any particular drug. Terazosin hydrochloride has been found to exist at room temperature in four solvent-free forms that can be isolated directly, one solvent-free form that can be prepared by desolvation of a methanolate, a methanol solvate, and a dihydrate. This study presents characterization and methods for preparation of each of these forms. Data are also presented demonstrating the relative stability of these forms.
The objective of this study was to evaluate whether extracorporeal magnetic innervation (ExMI) combined with alpha-blocker therapy is more effective than alpha-blocker monotherapy for patients with non-inflammatory chronic prostatitis (CP)/chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CPPS), category IIIB. Patients were randomized to either terazosin monotherapy (group 1, n=21) or terazosin combined with ExMI therapy (group 2, n=19). Patients in group 2 had 12 treatment sessions of ExMI twice a week during 6 weeks. None of the patients experienced any side effects from treatment. The changes in each domain of the National Institutes of Health (NIH)-Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index (CPSI) measured on week 6 were not significantly different between the groups. However, the difference (median, 25-75th percentiles) between the two groups in total NIH-CPSI scores was -4 (-11.5, -2) for group 1 and -12 (-17.3, -2.3) for group 2, respectively (P=0.047). At 6 weeks, 47.6% (10 of 21) of group 1 had a >25% decrease in total NIH-CPSI compared with 78.9% (15 of 19) of group 2 (P=0.041). Also, more patients in group 2 (78.9%) were rated as responders with a 6-point decrease in NIH-CPSI compared with group 1 (47.6%) (P=0.041). The early results suggest that ExMI combined with alpha-blocker therapy has better effect than alpha-blocker monotherapy for the treatment of CP/CPPS.
Terazosin selectively antagonises alpha 1-adrenoceptor-mediated contraction of the prostate, prostatic capsule, proximal urethra and bladder base, and consequently reduces urethral pressure, bladder outlet resistance and urinary symptoms associated with symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia. The efficacy of terazosin is reflected in increases in peak urinary flow rate, and reductions in obstructive and irritative symptom scores compared with placebo, and reductions in residual urinary volume from baseline. Clinical improvements begin to occur within 2 weeks and have been sustained for up to 2 years. The most marked treatment effects tend to occur in patients with more severe pretreatment urinary flow abnormalities. The relatively long duration of action of terazosin, allowing once-daily administration, offers a potential clinical advantage over other alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonists although formal compliance studies have not been reported. Terazosin is generally well tolerated, but caution is recommended at treatment initiation and when dosage adjustments are made due to an increased risk of postural hypotension and related adverse effects at these times; such a risk has also been observed with several other alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonists. Although publication of clinical trial results with terazosin is still evolving, this drug shows promise in the treatment of patients with mild to moderate symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia for whom surgery is not absolutely indicated. Terazosin also shows promise as a nonsurgical treatment alternative in patients with severe symptoms who are unfit for surgery and also in those who are on long waiting lists for surgery.
Grapefruit juice had been fortuitously noted to elevate the concentration of felodipine in a pharmacological study of the effect of ethanol on felodipine. This effect was later confirmed not only for felodipine but also for three other dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers. I herein present what I believe to be the first case report describing a marked blood pressure-lowering effect of grapefruit juice in a person receiving an antihypertensive regimen of a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (nifedipine) and terazosin.
Terazosin is a new, long-acting, selective, postsynaptic alpha 1-adrenergic receptor antagonist with a chemical structure similar to that of prazosin. In this article the pharmacokinetics of terazosin are reviewed, and the incidence of adverse events in a dose-response study and a meta-analysis of 20 placebo-controlled trials involving a total of 1814 patients is presented. Peak plasma concentrations of terazosin are achieved 1 to 2 hours after oral administration. The relatively long half-life of terazosin (12 hours) enables it to be administered in a once-a-day regimen. Dose and plasma levels of terazosin show a linear relationship. Terazosin is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration. The pharmacokinetics of terazosin are not significantly affected by food, age, hypertension, or renal impairment. Adverse events after the administration of terazosin are usually minor and not age related. The incidence of syncope after therapeutic dosages of terazosin is minimal. Terazosin's effectiveness, combined with its pharmacokinetics, safety profile, and potentially favorable lipid effect, makes it a highly appropriate choice for antihypertensive therapy.
This open, multicenter phase III study was designed to assess the efficacy and long-term safety of terazosin (1 to 40 mg/day), alone or in combination with other antihypertensive drugs, in 364 patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension. Compared with baseline values, long-term terazosin monotherapy or combination therapy resulted in consistent decreases in both systolic and diastolic blood pressures, with a mean reduction in supine diastolic pressure of 12 to 14 mm Hg. The numbers of patients with controlled blood pressure at the last evaluable visit of each therapy period were as follows: terazosin alone, 106 of 245 (43%); terazosin with added diuretic, 70 of 112 (63%); diuretic with added terazosin, 47 of 88 (53%); and terazosin plus diuretic with added beta-blocker, 22 of 32 (69%). Most adverse events were mild or moderate in severity. Only pain in extremities had a higher incidence during long-term treatment (6%, 181 to 360-day period) than during initial short-term treatment (5%, 1 to 90-day period). Three of six syncopal events occurred during the initial 180 days of treatment; this 0.8% (3/364) incidence was comparable with that reported previously for short-term studies. Only one case of syncope occurred during terazosin monotherapy. Terazosin was judged to be a safe and effective long-term medication for the treatment of hypertension.
The alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonists doxazosin and terazosin and the 5 alpha-reductase inhibitor finasteride are used in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia. The aim of this study was to assess the potential pharmacokinetic interaction of doxazosin or terazosin when coadministered with finasteride. This was a randomized, placebo-controlled, multi-center study. Ninety healthy men were assigned to one of six treatment groups: doxazosin; doxazosin plus finasteride; terazosin; terazosin plus finasteride; placebo; and placebo plus finasteride. Plasma concentrations, maximum plasma concentration (Cmax), time to maximum concentration (tmax), and area under the plasma concentration-time curve from 0 to 24 hours (AUC0-24) of doxazosin, terazosin, and finasteride were determined. Ratios of Cmax and AUC for doxazosin and terazosin were not significantly altered by coadministration with finasteride. The Cmax and AUC0-24 of finasteride were not significantly altered by coadministration with doxazosin. However, Cmax and AUC0-24 of finasteride were significantly higher after coadministration with terazosin. There is no statistically significant pharmacokinetic interaction between finasteride and doxazosin; however, there is a statistically significant interaction between finasteride and terazosin, which affects the pharmacokinetics of finasteride but not those of terazosin. The clinical significance of this interaction remains to be determined.
A simple, fast and sensitive LC-MS/MS method was developed to quantify terazosin in human plasma. The mobile phase consisted of acetonitrile-0.1% (v/v) formic acid (70:30, v/v). Prazosin was used as internal standard (IS). As deproteinization agent, acetonitrile produced a clean sample. A higher response intensity with more symmetrical peak was obtained using Agilent Poroshell 120 EC-C18 - Fast LC column (100 x 2.1mmID, 2.7 mum) compared with Kinetex XB-C18 (100 x 2.1 mm, 2.6 microm) column. The response of terazosin and IS were approximately two times in citrate phosphate dextrose (CPD) plasma compared with dipotassium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (K(2)EDTA) plasma. Plasma calibration curve was linear from 1.0 to 100.0 ng/mL, with coefficient of determination r(2) >/= 0.99. The within-run and between-run precision values (CV, %) were <5.2% and <7.8%, while accuracy values were 102.8-112.7% and 103.4-112.2%. The extended run accuracy was 98.6-102.8% and precision (CV, %) 4.3-10.4%. The recovery of analyte was >98% and IS >94%. Terazosin in plasma kept at benchtop was stable for 24 h, in autosampler tray for 48 h, in instrumentation room for 48 h, for 7 freeze-thaw cycles and in freezer for 140 days. Terazosin and IS stock standard solutions were stable for 140 days at room temperature and in the chiller. The high throughput method was successfully utilized to measure 935 samples in a bioequivalence study of terazosin.
PURPOSE: The present study aims to assess and compare the effects of carvedilol and terazosin plus enalapril on lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), the urine flow, and blood pressure (BP) in patients with moderate hypertension (HTN) and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this randomized crossover trial, a total of 40 men with HTN and LUTS symptoms were enrolled. The first group was treated with carvedilol, and the second one received terazosin plus enalapril. After eight weeks of treatment, the patients experienced a one-month washout period, and the treatments changed and continued for eight weeks. To diagnose BPH in the study, the international prostate symptom score (IPSS) questionnaire was used. Moreover, the prostate-specific antigen (PSA), the post-void residual (PVR) urine volume, and the maximum urinary flow rate (Q-max using the uroflowmetry test) were measured. RESULTS: Effect assessment results in this crossover trial illustrated neither carryover effects nor significant treatment effects on all primary outcomes (P > 0.05). Moreover, the results for the period effect indicated a significant reduction in BP (systolic and diastolic), PVR, and IPSS, yet a significant raise in Qmax. CONCLUSION: The effects of carvedilol are similar to those of the combination of terazosin and enalapril in patients with moderate HTN and BPH in controlling LUTS. Carvedilol could be used as an appropriative drug in patients with moderate HTN and cardiac problems with LUTS of BPH. Further studies are recommended to be conducted to investigate and compare the efficacy of carvedilol with that of other alpha-blockers with a larger sample size and over a longer period of time.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the cost-effectiveness and functional status effects of terazosin, an alpha(1)-adrenoceptor antagonist, compared with placebo in the treatment of men with moderate to severe, symptomatic, benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). METHODS: Prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter trial of 2084 patients was conducted at 15 academic regional centers and 141 community-based satellite centers. Information about the use of health care resources and non-disease-specific functional status measures was collected by a standardized telephone interview of patients at baseline and every month thereafter for 12 months. Other information, such as American Urologic Association (AUA) disease-specific functional status scores, was obtained from the patient study records. Patients had a mean age of 65.7 years (range, 46 to 94), with a clinical diagnosis of BPH. At baseline men had at least moderate BPH symptoms by AUA Symptom score (13 or more) and Bother Score (8 or more). On entry, patients at regional sites had peak urinary flow rates 15 mL/s or less and total voided urine volumes 150 mL or greater. A total of 1053 patients were randomized to terazosin and 1031 to placebo treatment. Primary outcome measures included payments for all direct medical resource consumption (inpatient care, emergency department care, outpatient care, and medications); changes in three AUA disease-specific functional status indicators, (Symptom, Bother, and Quality of Life scores), and non-disease-specific functional status measures (days of work loss, days of customary activity loss, and days of bed rest). RESULTS: Total payments for health care resource (including study drug medication), adjusted to reflect 1000 patients per treatment group, were $3,781,803 and $3,568,263 in the placebo and terazosin groups, respectively. All three AUA disease-specific functional status scores improved significantly more in the terazosin group than in the placebo group. We found no difference between terazosin and placebo in all three nonspecific functional status measures. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, terazosin therapy for moderate to severe symptomatic BPH results in approximately equivalent payments for direct medical care, better disease-specific functional status improvement, and comparable change in non-disease-specific functional status measures.
To determine the hemodynamic effects of a new alpha 1 blocker, terazosin, in congestive heart failure, six patients with this condition underwent hemodynamic testing (at rest and during exercise) before and after dosing. Doses of 2, 5, and 10 mg were examined in sequence over 3 days to define dose-response characteristics. Terazosin, in these doses, decreased pulmonary and systemic vascular resistances and right atrial and pulmonary capillary wedge pressures. Terazosin increased stroke volume and cardiac output, presumably through afterload-reduction, without altering heart rate. These aforementioned responses were apparent both at rest and during exercise. While a direct relationship existed between dose and plasma concentration, a similar relationship was not observed for dose (or plasma concentration) and hemodynamic response; no differences were noted between the hemodynamic responses to the three doses. Improvement in hemodynamics persisted and the clinical status and exercise capacity improved in the four patients chronically treated (over 2 months) with terazosin. Treating the heightened tone of the sympathetic nervous system in congestive heart failure with the alpha 1 blocker, terazosin, may be of benefit to some patients afflicted with this disorder.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the initial, long-term, and durable response rates to terazosin, placebo, or other therapies in patients with chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome. METHODS: A total of 100 subjects, aged 20 to 50 years, who met the National Institutes of Health criteria for chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome and had not previously been treated with alpha-blockers, were entered in a 14-week, double-blind comparison of terazosin or placebo therapy. Nonresponders and responders with subsequent relapse were treated with terazosin or other medications (open label). The criterion for response was a score of 0 to 2 on the National Institutes of Health Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index quality-of-life item. The initial response was evaluated at week 14, and the long-term response was evaluated after a median of 38 weeks (range 34 to 42), regardless of any additional treatment. A durable response was defined as an initial response without additional treatment. RESULTS: Of the 43 patients in the terazosin group, 24 (56%) had an initial response compared with 14 (33%) of 43 subjects in the placebo group (P = 0.03). Long-term responses were noted in 23 (56%) of 41 assessable subjects treated with terazosin initially compared with 12 (32%) of 38 assessable subjects treated with placebo (P = 0.03). Of the nonresponders and initial responders with relapse, 7 (41%) of 17 subjects responded to terazosin compared with 7 (21%) of 34 given other treatment (P = 0.12). Durable responses occurred in 18 (44%) of the 41 assessable patients treated initially with terazosin and in 6 (16%) of 38 treated initially with placebo (P = 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Patients treated with terazosin were more likely to have initial, long-term, and durable responses than those treated with placebo.
alpha-Blockers and calcium antagonists are commonly used in the treatment of hypertension, but few data are available concerning first dose or steady state (SS) hemodynamic and pharmacokinetic effects of these drugs when they are used in combination therapy. To examine these interactions, we measured supine and standing blood pressure (BP), heart rate (HR), and cardiac index (CI) for 6 h in 24 hypertensive patients after 2 weeks of placebo, again after the first dose or 3 weeks of therapy (SS) with either 120 mg verapamil (V) twice a day, or 1 mg terazosin (T) titrated weekly to 5 mg daily, and finally when T was added to V (group VT) or V added to T (group TV), acutely and at SS. Changes in supine hemodynamics when T was added to V or when V was added to T were similar and included a further reduction in BP, a transient increase in HR, and little or no change in CI. Both groups experienced significant decreases in standing blood pressure, especially 0.5 to 2 h following initiation of combination therapy despite significant increases in standing HR and CI. Standing BP tended to be lower in group TV after the first dose, but minimum standing systolic BP was not significantly different between groups (group TV 97 mm Hg at 1 h; group VT 109 mm Hg at 1.5 h, P > .05). Four patients in group TV and two in group VT experienced symptomatic orthostatic hypotension with the first dose of double-agent treatment. Pharmacokinetic interactions, including an increase in the bioavailability of T when V was added, did not correlate with the degree of orthostasis. After 3 weeks of combined therapy, the orthostatic change in BP had attenuated and symptoms had improved in all patients. We conclude that T and V represent an effective combination for the treatment of essential hypertension, but that orthostasis may result when initiating combination therapy. The orthostasis seen in some patients appears to be due to the combined vasodilatory effects rather than negative ionotropic or chronotropic effects.
BACKGROUND: The primary objectives of the treatment for the lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) are to produce rapid, sustained, and safe improvements in the symptoms that affect the quality of life in the majority of men over 50. In this study, we evaluated the efficacy and safety of the combined therapy with terazosin (apha1-adrenergic receptor antagonist) and tolterodine (anticholinergic agent) for LUTS associated with BPH. METHODS: This combination study included 69 patients diagnosed with LUTS associated with BPH based on the International Prostate Symptom Scores (IPSS), urinary flow rate, prostate volume, urinary residual, and their serum prostate-specific antigen levels. Initially, 191 patients were treated with terazosin 2 mg once daily for one week. Those patients with continued LUTS after the initial treatment were allocated randomly into two groups: terazosin group (n = 36) in which patients were treated with terazosin 2 mg once daily for six weeks, and combination group (n = 33) in which patients were treated with both terazosin 2 mg once daily and tolterodine 2 mg twice daily for 6 weeks. RESULTS: The IPSS were significantly improved in both groups after treatment, and the reduction of IPSS in the combination group was significantly greater than that in the terazosin group (P < 0.01). A decrease in urgency, frequency and nocturia were the main contributory factors causing the reduction of IPSS in the combination group. The differences about the peak urinary flow rate and the residual urine from the baseline values were noted in both groups after treatment, but were not significant between the two groups. The incidence of adverse effects in the combination group was higher than that in the terazosin group. As expected the most common adverse effect was mouth dryness which was associated with anticholinergic drugs such as tolterodine. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with LUTS associated BPH appear the improved IPSS after combined therapy with terazosin and tolterodine. This study, although short term and limited numbers of patients, provides evidence that the combined therapy with terazosin plus tolterodine is a good approach for meeting the objectives of rapid, sustained, and safe improvements in the LUTS associated with BPH. And the profile of patients in this study might be used as the indication of such combined therapy for LUTS associated with BPH without urodynamic evaluation.
In a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, the efficacy and safety of terazosin and prazosin were compared in patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension. Patients were randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups: terazosin administered once daily, prazosin administered twice daily, or placebo. After a two-week placebo lead-in period, each patient received increasing doses of terazosin or prazosin at two-week intervals until the supine diastolic blood pressure was decreased by 7 mm Hg or more compared with baseline, or until the maximum dose was reached. Patients in the placebo treatment group were similarly "titrated." A patient continued taking the selected dose for the remainder of the 14-week study. A total of 174 patients entered the active treatment period of the study; 155 were included in the efficacy analysis. Once-daily administration of terazosin resulted in significant (p less than or equal to 0.05) decreases in supine and standing diastolic blood pressure (-7.6 mm Hg and -8.3 mm Hg, respectively) when compared with placebo (-4.1 mm Hg and -2.2 mm Hg). The mean decrease in supine diastolic blood pressure resulting from twice-daily administration of prazosin (-4.9 mm Hg) was not significant when compared with placebo, whereas the decrease in mean standing diastolic blood pressure observed in the prazosin-treated group (-6.1 mm Hg) was significantly greater than that observed with placebo. Similar numbers of patients in all three groups reported adverse experiences of a subjective nature. In conclusion, once-daily administration of terazosin appears to be as safe and at least as effective as twice-daily administration of prazosin for the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension.
