Despite its history as a human teratogen, thalidomide is emerging as a treatment for cancer and inflammatory diseases. Although the evolution of its clinical application could not have been predicted from the tragedy associated with its misuse in the past, its history serves as a lesson in drug development that underscores the need to understand the molecular pharmacology of a compound's activity, including associated toxicities. Here, we summarise the applications for thalidomide with an emphasis on clinical trials published over the past 10 years, and consider our knowledge of the molecular pharmacology of the drug in the context of clinical trial data, attempting to provide a mechanism-guided understanding of its activity.
Thalidomide and its derivatives are powerful cancer therapeutics that are among the best-understood molecular glue degraders (MGDs). These drugs selectively reprogram the E3 ubiquitin ligase cereblon (CRBN) to commit target proteins for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. MGDs create novel recognition interfaces on the surface of the E3 ligase that engage in induced protein-protein interactions with neosubstrates. Molecular insight into their mechanism of action opens exciting opportunities to engage a plethora of targets through a specific recognition motif, the G-loop. Our analysis shows that current CRBN-based MGDs can in principle recognize over 2,500 proteins in the human proteome that contain a G-loop. We review recent advances in tuning the specificity between CRBN and its MGD-induced neosubstrates and deduce a set of simple rules that govern these interactions. We conclude that rational MGD design efforts will enable selective degradation of many more proteins, expanding this therapeutic modality to more disease areas.
BACKGROUND: Recurrent bleeding from the small intestine accounts for 5 to 10% of cases of gastrointestinal bleeding and remains a therapeutic challenge. Thalidomide has been evaluated for the treatment of recurrent bleeding due to small-intestinal angiodysplasia (SIA), but confirmatory trials are lacking. METHODS: We conducted a multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial to investigate the efficacy and safety of thalidomide for the treatment of recurrent bleeding due to SIA. Eligible patients with recurrent bleeding (at least four episodes of bleeding during the previous year) due to SIA were randomly assigned to receive thalidomide at an oral daily dose of 100 mg or 50 mg or placebo for 4 months. Patients were followed for at least 1 year after the end of the 4-month treatment period. The primary end point was effective response, which was defined as a reduction of at least 50% in the number of bleeding episodes that occurred during the year after the end of thalidomide treatment as compared with the number that occurred during the year before treatment. Key secondary end points were cessation of bleeding without rebleeding, blood transfusion, hospitalization because of bleeding, duration of bleeding, and hemoglobin levels. RESULTS: Overall, 150 patients underwent randomization: 51 to the 100-mg thalidomide group, 49 to the 50-mg thalidomide group, and 50 to the placebo group. The percentages of patients with an effective response in the 100-mg thalidomide group, 50-mg thalidomide group, and placebo group were 68.6%, 51.0%, and 16.0%, respectively (P<0.001 for simultaneous comparison across the three groups). The results of the analyses of the secondary end points supported those of the primary end point. Adverse events were more common in the thalidomide groups than in the placebo group overall; specific events included constipation, somnolence, limb numbness, peripheral edema, dizziness, and elevated liver-enzyme levels. CONCLUSIONS: In this placebo-controlled trial, treatment with thalidomide resulted in a reduction in bleeding in patients with recurrent bleeding due to SIA. (Funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China and the Shanghai Municipal Education Commission, Gaofeng Clinical Medicine; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02707484.).
Mono- and dihydroxylated metabolites of thalidomide were efficiently prepared and characterized, and their inhibitory activity on tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha production in the human monocytic leukemia cell line THP-1 was evaluated. 5,N-Dihydroxythalidomide was a much more potent TNF-alpha production inhibitor than thalidomide.
This review article provides a comprehensive overview of thalidomide upper limb embryopathy including updates about its pathogenesis, a historical account of the management of the paediatric thalidomide patient, experience with management of the adult patient, as well as creating awareness about early onset age-related changes associated with limb differences. Despite its withdrawal from the market in November 1961, novel discoveries have meant thalidomide is licensed again and currently still in use to treat a variety of conditions, including inflammatory disorders and some cancers. Yet, if not used safely, thalidomide still has the potential to cause damage to the embryo. Recent work identifying thalidomide analogues that retain clinical benefits yet without the harmful effects are showing great promise. Understanding the problems thalidomide survivors face as they age can allow surgeons to support their unique healthcare issues and translate these principles of care to other congenital upper limb differences.
BACKGROUND: It has been reported that thalidomide may be effective in treating inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). AIM: To review the evidence examining the efficacy and safety of thalidomide for inducing and maintaining remission in Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). METHODS: The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, PubMed (1950-August 2014), EMBASE (1984-August 2014), Scopus, and Web of knowledge were searched for randomised controlled trials (RCTs), observational studies and case series. The primary outcomes were induction of remission or response for active IBD or relapse rate for patients in remission and subsequently on thalidomide/analogues for at least 3 months. RESULTS: Twelve studies (2 RCTs and 10 case series) met the inclusion criteria for inducing remission and included 248 patients (10 with UC, 238 with CD). Only one RCT of paediatric CD achieved high quality scores (remission rate thalidomide: 46%, placebo: 12%; p=0.01). The crude pooled remission rate for thalidomide was 49% and 25% in luminal and perianal CD respectively. For UC, 50% achieved remission and 10% had partial response. One case series reported 21 patients (17 CD, four UC) who maintained remission for 6 months. Many adverse events were reported including sedation (32%) and peripheral neuropathy (20%). CONCLUSIONS: One high quality RCT showed that thalidomide is effective for inducing remission in paediatric CD. The current evidence is insufficient to support using thalidomide to induce remission in UC or adult CD, or to maintain remission in IBD. Significant adverse events may occur, necessitating discontinuation of thalidomide.
The thalidomide-DNA interactions have been investigated in detail by numerous biophysical techniques such as UV-vis, dye displacement assay, viscosity, cyclic voltammetry, circular dichroism, molecular docking, molecular dynamic simulation, FT-IR and (1)H NMR spectroscopy. CD spectroscopy, thermal denaturation and viscosity measurement explained that thalidomide is groove binder. Molecular docking analysis highlighted that thalidomide binds trough minor groove of calf thymus DNA which also confirmed from dye displacement experiment. To our knowledge, this is the first instance thalidomide was shown to binds with calf thymus DNA. Molecular dynamic simulation indicated that the thalidomide-DNA system was stabilized by electrostatic attraction as the main interaction and mode of binding is minor groove. Our study provides a better understanding to the DNA-thalidomide binding affinity and it mechanism. Overall, all these in formations can be used for further understanding the pharmacological effects of thalidomide.
Thalidomide has been successful in the treatment of several dermatologic conditions unresponsive to other agents. Further experience may lead to a better understanding of its mechanism of action in these various diseases. Thalidomide should be considered an extremely valuable therapeutic option in selected patients when the benefits clearly outweigh the risks of teratogenicity and peripheral neuropathy.
BACKGROUND: Recurrent aphthous stomatitis (RAS) is considered as the most common oral mucosal lesion affecting up to 25% of people worldwide. Thalidomide has been reported for the treatment of RAS, but the evidence has not been systematically evaluated. We first systematically reviewed the efficacy and safety of thalidomide for the treatment of RAS. METHODS: We searched The Cochrane Library, PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, Embase, China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), Chinese BioMedical Literature Database (CBM), Wanfang Data, and VIP information from inception to December 2023. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing thalidomide with control for RAS were included in the analysis. The primary outcome were complete response and overall response, and the secondary outcome were recurrence interval (RI), ulcer number and size, healing time, visual analogue scale (VAS), immunological data, and adverse events. Meta-analysis was conducted using the Review Manager 5.4 software. RESULTS: Twenty-one trials involving 1668 patients were included in this review. The results of our meta-analysis showed that thalidomide significantly improved the complete response rate and overall response rate, prolonged the recurrence interval, accelerated the healing process, reduced the number and size of ulcers, and lowered TNF-alpha levels in the treatment of RAS. However, thalidomide significantly increases adverse events. RESULTS: Thalidomide has a significant benefit in the treatment of RAS. However, considering the potential side effects of thalidomide, it may be an optimal treatment option for major RAS patients or cases that do not respond to topical agents. TRIAL REGISTRATION: PROSPERO registration number: CRD42024495038.
Congenital heart disease is the leading cause of death in the first year of life. Mutations only in few genes have been linked to some cases of CHD. Thalidomide was used by pregnant women for morning sickness but was removed from the market because it caused severe malformations including CHDs. We used both in silico docking software, and in vitro molecular and biochemical methods to document a novel interaction involving Thalidomide, TBX5, and HAND2. Thalidomide binds readily to TBX5 through amino acids R81, R82, and K226 all implicated in DNA binding. It reduces TBX5 binding to DNA by 40%, and suppresses TBX5 mediated activation of the NPPA and VEGF promoters by 70%. We documented a novel interaction between TBX5 and HAND2, and showed that a p.G202V HAND2 variant associated with CHD and coronary artery diseases found in a large Lebanese family with high consanguinity, drastically inhibited this interaction by 90%. Similarly, thalidomide inhibited the TBX5/HAND2 physical interaction, and the in silico docking revealed that the same amino acids involved in the interaction of TBX5 with DNA are also involved in its binding to HAND2. Our results establish a HAND2/TBX5 pathway implicated in heart development and diseases.
Thalidomide, an anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory agent, has a potential role in cases with central nervous system tuberculosis (CNS-TB) with paradoxical reactions. Although several articles have described the use of thalidomide in CNS-TB, no systematic review has been performed in this regard. Different electronic databases were searched for articles describing the use of thalidomide in patients with CNS-TB. For determining pooled estimates in the quantitative review, studies with a minimum sample size of 5 were only considered, whereas for qualitative synthesis even single case reports were included. Fixed or random effect models were used suitably depending on the degree of heterogeneity. Fourteen articles describing a total of 107 patients (98 children and 9 adults) were selected from 156 records. A favorable clinical response was observed in 89% of patients with CNS-TB who had paradoxical reactions refractory to corticosteroids. Majority of the studies used a dose of 2-6 mg/kg/day and around 24% suffered from at least one adverse effect, with a mortality of 5%. Predominant adverse effects were rash (9.5%), neuropathy (6%), and elevated liver transaminases (9.5%). Only one placebo-controlled trial has been performed till now, which showed that high-dose thalidomide has numerous adverse effects, without any clinically significant improvement as compared with placebo. While in HIV-positive patients with TB-immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome thalidomide was helpful in around 82% of cases. Low-dose thalidomide is helpful in patients with CNS-TB who had a paradoxical reaction and unresponsive to corticosteroids. Large, randomized trials are needed to provide more concrete information regarding the safety and efficacy of thalidomide.
BACKGROUND: Maintenance of remission is a major issue in the management of Crohn's disease. Thalidomide, a tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) inhibitor and its analogue, lenalidomide, may have a role in the management of Crohn's disease, but it is not clear whether it is an effective maintenance therapy. OBJECTIVES: To conduct a systematic review to evaluate the efficacy and safety of thalidomide and lenalidomide for the maintenance of remission in Crohn's disease. SEARCH STRATEGY: MEDLINE (1966 to September 2008), EMBASE (1984 to September 2008), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials from the Cochrane Library (Issue 3, 2008) and the IBD/FBD Review Group Specialized Trials Register were searched to identify relevant studies. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials which compared thalidomide with either placebo or an active comparator were considered for inclusion. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: No trials met the inclusion criteria. MAIN RESULTS: No studies that satisfied the inclusion criteria were found. In the absence of any suitable randomised controlled trial in this area, no analysis was performed. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is no evidence to support or refute the use of thalidomide or its analogue, lenalidomide, as maintenance therapy for patients with Crohn's disease. Given the teratogenic nature of thalidomide its use for maintenance therapy is difficult to justify. Well designed clinical trials are needed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of lenalidomide in Crohn's disease and its use is not recommended until these data are available.
Various analogs of known immunomodulatory derivatives of thalidomide (1) (IMiDs: 3, 5) were synthesized, focusing on cell-differentiation-inducing, cyclooxygenase-inhibitory and anti-angiogenesis activities. Among the prepared compounds, NIDO-33 (14) showed cell differentiation-inducing activity on HL-60 cells and anti-angiogenic activity on human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). AIDO-00 (7) also showed anti-angiogenic activity. NIDO-11 (8) showed an enhancing effect on all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)-induced HL-60 cell differentiation, and AIDO-30 (13) exhibited cyclooxygenase (COX)-inhibitory activity.
We identified novel dicarboximides that were selectively cytotoxic towards human leukemia cells. Using chemical and biological methods, we characterized the biological activity, identified cellular protein targets and defined the mechanism of action of the test dicarboximides. The reported IC(50) values (concentration required to reduce cell survival fraction to 50% of control) of selected dicarboximides were similar or lower than IC(50) of registered anticancer drugs, for example cytarabine, sorafenib, irinotecan. Test compounds induced apoptosis in chronic myelogenous (K562) and acute lymphoblastic (MOLT-4) leukemia cells by activation of receptor and mitochondrial apoptotic pathways and increased the expression of proapoptotic genes (BAX, NOXA, HTRA2, TNFRSF10B, ESRRBL1). Selected dicarboximides displayed immunomodulatory activity and downregulated IKZF1 and IKZF3 transcription factors in K562 and MOLT-4 leukemia cells. ATP-binding cassette protein 50 (ABC50) was identified as a target for dicarboximides. Cancer cells with knocked down ABC50 showed increased resistance to dicarboximides. Based on the structure of dicarboximides and thalidomide, novel proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) were synthesized and used as tools to downregulate ABC50 in leukemia cells.
