Many asthmatic patients experience aggravation of symptoms overnight resulting in disruption of their sleep. Sustained-release theophylline represents at this time a major bronchodilator medication which possesses a sufficient duration of activity to avert the nocturnal breathing distress of asthma. Circadian rhythm-adapted theophylline schedules consisting of unequal dosing--more or all the drug taken in the evening--have proven efficacious in clinical investigations for certain patients. Although the kinetic behavior of some formulations is affected by food, the circadian rhythm-adapted schedules represent a significant step forward toward the goal of optimizating sustained-release theophyllines for patients who experience nighttime symptoms.
The potencies of caffeine, theophylline, lysine-theophylline and 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) in stimulating sperm motility have been compared, and we have found IBMX to be significantly more potent than the other three compounds, which did not exhibit significant differences in potency from each other.
The pharmacokinetics and urinary excretion of intravenously administered 7-(2,3-dihydroxypropyl) theophylline (dyphylline), were studied in a 37-yr-old asthmatic woman with ethylene diamine sensitivity who manifested intolerance to intravenous aminophylline on three separate occasions. In this subject, intravenously administered dyphylline was tolerated very well and was effective in the subsequent management of acute bronchospastic episodes. Dyphylline was significantly concentrated in the urine. This, coupled with its rapid clearance, suggests potential clinical application in patients with hepatic dysfunction. Though aminophylline sensitivity is rare, ethylene diamine sensitivity should be considered in untoward reactions to this drug.
The dissolution kinetics of theophylline monohydrate and anhydrous theophylline were investigated with a rotating-disk apparatus in buffer solutions at 298 K under sink conditions. The observed dissolution rate of theophylline monohydrate under various conditions agreed well with predictions based on the Extended Simultaneous Chemical Reaction and Dissolution concept. Below 337 K, anhydrous theophylline is converted to theophylline monohydrate in contact with water. The dissolution profile of anhydrous theophylline can be divided into three phases: a pre-transformation phase: anhydrous theophylline dissolves; the transformation phase, during which its dissolution rate drops to the level of the theophylline monohydrate dissolution rate; and steady state, at which the dissolution rate of anhydrous theophylline equals the dissolution rate of theophylline monohydrate. The presence of theophylline monohydrate crystals at the dissolving surface was confirmed by IR spectroscopy and microscopic observation. The length of the transformation phase, depending on the characteristics of the diffusion boundary layer, varied with the experimental conditions (e.g., pH and rotation speed). It was concluded that during the dissolution process the disk is covered with theophylline monohydrate crystals that precipitate from the supersaturated medium adjacent to the disk surface, and that crystallization of theophylline monohydrate is a precipitation process controlled by hydrodynamic and diffusion parameters.
For a certain class of drugs blood levels can be used to monitor therapy. Based on the concept of a target concentration strategy criteria for optimal treatment schemes are given. The goal of these criteria is to define dose regimens that lead to concentrations within the target concentration range. The performance indices of these criteria are evaluated and applied to the dose regimen assessment for theophylline.
Theophylline (dimethylxanthine) has been used to treat airway diseases for more than 80 years. It was originally used as a bronchodilator, but the relatively high doses required are associated with frequent side effects, so its use declined as inhaled beta2-agonists became more widely used. More recently it has been shown to have antiinflammatory effects in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) at lower concentrations. The molecular mechanism of bronchodilatation is inhibition of phosphodiesterase (PDE)3, but the antiinflammatory effect may be due to inhibition of PDE4 and histone deacetylase-2 activation, resulting in switching off of activated inflammatory genes. Through this mechanism, theophylline also reverses corticosteroid resistance, and this may be of particular value in severe asthma and COPD, wherein histone deacetylase-2 activity is reduced. Theophylline is given systemically (orally as slow-release preparations for chronic treatment and intravenously for acute exacerbations of asthma). Efficacy is related to blood concentrations, which are determined mainly by hepatic metabolism, which may be increased or decreased in several diseases and by concomitant drug therapy. Theophylline is now usually used as an add-on therapy in patients with asthma not well controlled on inhaled corticosteroids with or without long-acting beta2-agonists and in patients with COPD with severe disease not controlled by bronchodilator therapy. Side effects are related to plasma concentrations and include nausea, vomiting, and headaches due to PDE inhibition and at higher concentrations to cardiac arrhythmias and seizures due to adenosine A1-receptor antagonism. In the future, low-dose theophylline may be useful in reversing corticosteroid resistance in COPD and severe asthma.
Supporting evidence was found for the beta-blockade theory of Szentivanyi. Asthmatics (n = 6) showed lower basal plasma cyclic AMP levels and lower cyclic AMP levels after administration of a short- and long-acting theophylline preparations (Theolair and Theolair retard) than normals (n = 6) did. No difference was found in this respect between Theolair and Theolair retard. Basal cyclic AMP levels showed a diurnal variation, with highest levels in the morning which gradually decreased during the day. The correlation of the plasma cyclic AMP levels with the lung function change after stimulation with theophyllines in asthmatics was rather poor. This is probably caused by the rather low changes in plasma cyclic AMP levels.
The effect of steady state therapeutic theophylline serum levels on lithium renal clearance was investigated. Group mean lithium renal clearances and serum lithium levels varied in predicted fashion. Individual variability in these parameters was significant. Clinical implications are considered and management suggestions made.
Theophylline toxicity continues to be a commonly encountered clinical problem. Patients may present with a vast array of toxic manifestations, including life-threatening cardiovascular and neurologic toxicity. Despite the considerable attention this topic has received in the literature, there remain some important controversies regarding the identification of high risk patients and how best to manage them. This review attempts to summarize the current state of knowledge regarding theophylline toxicity with special emphasis on toxic manifestations and the role of elimination enhancing modalities.
Theophylline was first isolated in 1888 and remains the most commonly used medication worldwide for the treatment of asthma. It decreases the need for asthma rescue medications by people who have asthma and is an effective steroid-sparing agent for patients who tolerate it. Recently, investigators have shown that theophylline decreases airway inflammation, accelerates eosinophil apoptosis, and decreases recruitment of lymphocytes and neutrophils to the lungs at low doses. It is classified as a phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitor, but its therapeutic mechanism of action remains undetermined. Theophylline should be reevaluated as a long-term medication for the treatment of asthma because of its ease of use, low cost, and recent evidence of its anti-inflammatory actions.
In patients requiring a high or low dose of theophylline the pharmacokinetics of theophylline and enprofylline were studied. The low-dose group took an average daily dose of 8.91 mg/kg body wt. and the high-dose group 24.75 mg/kg body wt. The average half-life of theophylline in the former was 7.11 h and in the latter 4.72 h. The average clearances (CL) of theophylline were 2.83 and 4.58 l/h, respectively. The daily oral intake of theophylline was negatively correlated with the theophylline t1/2 (r = -0.63). While the t1/2 of enprofylline was similar in the two groups, CL and volume of distribution (Vc) were slightly (about 30%) but significantly higher in patients requiring a high dose of theophylline. CL of enprofylline did not correlate with CL of theophylline, nor was the Vc of the two drugs correlated. Interindividual variability in t1/2 and CL was considerably lower for enprofylline than for theophylline.
The metabolism and pharmacokinetics of intravenously administered theophylline and aminophylline (theophylline ethylenediamine) have been studied in 3 volunteers, using 14C-labelled theophylline. Both compounds were metabolized extensively and 1,3-dimethyluric acid, 1-methyluric acid, 3-methylxanthine and two unknown minor metabolites were excreted in the urine, in addition to theophylline. The elimination of theophylline, 1,3-dimethyluric acid, 1-methyluric acid and the unknown metabolites followed first-order kinetics, but that of 3-methylxanthine followed Michaelis-Menten kinetics. When given as aminophylline, theophylline was metabolized more rapidly and extensively than when given alone. The recovery of 14C in the urine was significantly higher after aminophylline than after theophylline. Abstention from intake of dietary methylxanthines for 7 days resulted in more rapid and extensive metabolism of aminophylline compared with results from the same subjects on their usual diets. The results indicate that, from a metabolic and pharmacokinetic viewpoint, aminophylline and theophylline are not equivalent.
Theophylline level testing enables the physician to monitor patients on theophylline and maintain benefit vs risk at an optimum ratio. This study consisted of a retrospective chart review of 53 patients who had a total of 103 serum theophylline level determinations (STLDs) over a 12-month period. The study was designed to look at reasons why physicians ordered STLDs and to what extent those results influenced subsequent theophylline prescribing. Findings showed that a large number of STLDs were ordered on asymptomatic patients with no recent dose change or initiation of therapy and no recent hospitalization or emergency room visit. The most common reason for ordering an STLD was presentation with symptoms or signs of asthma and no other recent events. On several occasions when low results were obtained, theophylline dosage was not increased. In some of these cases the patient's clinical presentation may have influenced the decision to maintain the same dosage. Use of erythromycin and smoking status were observed to affect theophylline clearance. Most physicians failed to document time of last theophylline dose, which hindered accurate interpretation of STLDs.
The influence of time of drug administration on pharmacokinetics of theophylline was studied both after ingestion of a sustained-release tablet, containing choline theophyllinate ( Zy 15061-S. R.; Teovent ; Sabidal ; ZYMA S.A.) and after intravenous infusion of aminophylline to eight healthy volunteers. Both drugs were administered in the morning (10 a.m.) and on a separate occasion in the evening (10 p.m.) after a 12 h period of fasting. After oral administration of a dose of 540 mg theophylline, the drug was steadily absorbed, both during day-time and during night-time. In some subjects absorption was slower in the evening. Maximum theophylline plasma concentrations were reached after 3.3 +/- 0.4 h (mean +/- SD) and 3.9 +/- 1.4 h respectively (not significantly different p greater than 0.05). The maximum plasma concentrations were almost identical after administration in the morning and in the evening (12.6 +/- 3.3 mg X l-1 and 13.1 +/- 1.4 mg X l-1 respectively). There was also no significant difference (p greater than 0.05) between the areas under the plasma concentration-time curves after oral and intravenous administration, both at day-time and at night-time. This finding indicates complete bioavailability of the sustained release tablets on both occasions. After administration of the tablets in the morning the plasma concentration 12 h post dosing was significantly lower than after administration in the evening: c1 12 accounted for 6.0 +/- 2.0 mg X l-1 after intake at 10 a.m. and for 7.9 +/- 2.1 mg X l-1 after ingestion at 10 p.m. (p less than 0.01). A similar observation was done after intravenous administration of the drug: c12 was 6.6 +/- 1.6 mg X l-1 after starting the infusion in the morning and 8.0 +/- 1.8 mg X l-1 after infusing the drug in the evening (p less than 0.01). This phenomenon could be explained by the finding of a significantly prolonged half-life of theophylline during night-time, provided that the plasma concentrations were in the range of 5 to 15 mg X l-1 (which coincides approximately with the therapeutic range of the drug).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
A simple chromatographic procedure was developed for the separation and determination of theophylline and hydroxyethyltheophylline. An aliquot of diluted syrup was pipetted into a chromatographic column containing a strong anion-exchange resin, which retains theophylline and allows the hydroxyethyl derivative to pass through it. Theophylline was subsequently eluted with 1 N HCl and determined by difference spectrophotometry at 284 nm; its derivative was determined at 272 nm.
The question of whether to prescribe once-daily or twice-daily theophylline was investigated using decision-analysis techniques with sensitivity procedures. While the relative efficacies of the two theophylline preparations have been examined in a number of studies, previous efforts have not assessed the impact of compliance on therapeutic effectiveness. When a blood theophylline level of 10 to 20 micrograms is taken to constitute the therapeutic range, twice-daily has been shown to yield 15% greater efficacy than once-daily dosing. However, results of the present investigation suggest that a drop in compliance greater than 4 to 14%, associated with once- versus twice-daily dosing, would be sufficient to obliterate the apparent advantage of the twice-daily preparation. The existing empirical evidence suggests that selecting twice-daily over once-daily dosing will incur a drop in compliance that is substantially greater than 14%. Consequently, when the impact of compliance is incorporated into a decision analysis, once-daily dosing is favored over twice-daily dosing for most patients. The decision will favor twice-daily theophylline only in the unusual case in which continuity of contact with a given patient provides strong evidence that he/she is more than 80% likely to comply with the twice-daily regimen. Decision analyses applied to this topic would benefit greatly from better studies of compliance in asthmatic patients and more careful correlations of symptoms with varying medication usage.
We have applied the molecular mechanics Poisson-Boltzmann surface area (MM-PBSA) method (J. Srinivasan, T. E. Cheatham, P. Cieplak, P. A. Kollman, and D. A. Case, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 1998, Vol. 120, pp. 9401-9409) to study the interaction of an RNA aptamer with theophylline and its analogs. The MM-PBSA free energy analysis provides a reasonable absolute binding free energy for the RNA aptamer-theophylline complex formation. Energetic analysis reveals that the van der Waals interaction and the nonpolar contribution to solvation provide the basis for the favorable absolute free energy of complex. This trend is similar to other protein-ligand interactions studied previously. The MM-PBSA method also ranks the relative binding energies of five theophylline analogs approximately correctly, but not as well as the more conventional thermodynamic integration calculations, which were carried out to convert theophylline into its analogs. The comparison of MM-PBSA with TI suggests that the MM-PBSA method has some difficulties with the first-solvation-shell energetics.
