High-risk neuroblastoma is characterised by poor long-term survival, especially for very high-risk (VHR) patients (poor response of metastases after induction therapy). We report the results of an intensified high-dose chemotherapy (HDC) strategy to improve the prognosis of VHR patients. This strategy was based on tandem HDC with thiotepa and busulfan-melphalan (Bu-Mel) followed by autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT). All data were prospectively recorded in the Gustave Roussy Paediatric ASCT database. From April 2004 to August 2011, 26 patients were eligible for tandem HDC. The median age at diagnosis was 4.4 years (1-15.9). All patients had metastatic disease. MYCN was amplified in 5/26 tumours. Despite the cumulative toxicity of alkylating agents, the toxicity of the intensified HDC strategy was manageable. Thiotepa-related toxicity was mainly digestive, whereas sinusoidal obstruction syndrome was the main toxicity observed after Bu-Mel. The 3-year event-free survival of this cohort was 37.3% (21.3-56.7). This strategy will be compared with combined (131)I-mIBG/Bu-Mel in the upcoming SIOPEN VHR Neuroblastoma Protocol.
BACKGROUND: Standard treatment for patients with primary CNS lymphoma remains to be defined. Active therapies are often associated with increased risk of haematological or neurological toxicity. In this trial, we addressed the tolerability and efficacy of adding rituximab with or without thiotepa to methotrexate-cytarabine combination therapy (the MATRix regimen), followed by a second randomisation comparing consolidation with whole-brain radiotherapy or autologous stem cell transplantation in patients with primary CNS lymphoma. We report the results of the first randomisation in this Article. METHODS: For the international randomised phase 2 International Extranodal Lymphoma Study Group-32 (IELSG32) trial, HIV-negative patients (aged 18-70 years) with newly diagnosed primary CNS lymphoma and measurable disease were enrolled from 53 cancer centres in five European countries (Denmark, Germany, Italy, Switzerland, and the UK) and randomly assigned (1:1:1) to receive four courses of methotrexate 3.5 g/m(2) on day 1 plus cytarabine 2 g/m(2) twice daily on days 2 and 3 (group A); or the same combination plus two doses of rituximab 375 mg/m(2) on days -5 and 0 (group B); or the same methotrexate-cytarabine-rituximab combination plus thiotepa 30 mg/m(2) on day 4 (group C), with the three groups repeating treatment every 3 weeks. Patients with responsive or stable disease after the first stage were then randomly allocated between whole-brain radiotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation. A permuted blocks randomised design (block size four) was used for both randomisations, and a computer-generated randomisation list was used within each stratum to preserve allocation concealment. Randomisation was stratified by IELSG risk score (low vs intermediate vs high). No masking after assignment to intervention was used. The primary endpoint of the first randomisation was the complete remission rate, analysed by modified intention to treat. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01011920. FINDINGS: Between Feb 19, 2010, and Aug 27, 2014, 227 eligible patients were recruited. 219 of these 227 enrolled patients were assessable. At median follow-up of 30 months (IQR 22-38), patients treated with rituximab and thiotepa had a complete remission rate of 49% (95% CI 38-60), compared with 23% (14-31) of those treated with methotrexate-cytarabine alone (hazard ratio 0.46, 95% CI 0.28-0.74) and 30% (21-42) of those treated with methotrexate-cytarabine plus rituximab (0.61, 0.40-0.94). Grade 4 haematological toxicity was more frequent in patients treated with methotrexate-cytarabine plus rituximab and thiotepa, but infective complications were similar in the three groups. The most common grade 3-4 adverse events in all three groups were neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, anaemia, and febrile neutropenia or infections. 13 (6%) patients died of toxicity. INTERPRETATION: With the limitations of a randomised phase 2 study design, the IELSG32 trial provides a high level of evidence supporting the use of MATRix combination as the new standard chemoimmunotherapy for patients aged up to 70 years with newly diagnosed primary CNS lymphoma and as the control group for future randomised trials. FUNDING: Associazione Italiana del Farmaco, Cancer Research UK, Oncosuisse, and Swiss National Foundation.
The use of high-dose chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer has been an area of recent interest and the role of such treatment in the management of metastatic breast cancer is still to be defined. Multiple studies have suggested that such treatment can be given with minimal morbidity and mortality. We describe two cases of life-threatening interstitial pneumonitis, following high-dose chemotherapy (HDT) with cyclophosphamide, thiotepa and docetaxel with stem cell rescue given for metastatic breast cancer. The available relevant literature is reviewed.
Effective reinduction regimens are needed for children with relapsed and refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML), as outcomes remain poor. Therapeutic options are limited in this heavily pretreated patient population, many of whom have reached lifetime recommended doses of anthracycline chemotherapy. The development of effective non-anthracycline-based salvage regimens is crucial to these patients who are at significant risk of life-threatening cardiotoxicity. We previously reported results of a phase 2 trial of a clofarabine-based regimen with topotecan, vinorelbine, and thiotepa (TVTC) in patients with relapsed acute leukemias. Here we report on an expanded bicenter cohort of 33 patients, <25 years of age, with relapsed/refractory AML treated with up to 2 cycles of the TVTC reinduction regimen from 2007 to 2018. The overall response rate, defined as complete remission or complete remission with partial recovery of platelet count, was 71.4% (95% confidence interval [CI], 41.9-91.6) for those patients in first relapse (n = 14) and 47.4% (95% CI, 24.4-71.1) for patients in second or greater relapse or with refractory disease. Responses were seen across multiple high-risk cytogenetic and molecular subtypes, with 84% of responders successfully bridged to allogeneic stem cell transplantation. The 5-year overall survival for patients in first relapse was 46.2% (95% CI, 19.1-73.3) and 50.0% (95% CI, 26.9-73.1) for patients who responded to TVTC. For pediatric and young adult patients with relapsed/refractory AML, TVTC reinduction compares favorably with currently used salvage regimens and warrants further exploration.
BACKGROUND: Thiotepa-based autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) improves survival in primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL), but > 30% of patients are unable to undergo ASCT following commonly used intensive induction regimens. METHODS: This retrospective population-based study included consecutive patients >/= 18 years old with PCNSL who were intended for ASCT in Alberta, Canada between 2011 and 2022. A reduced-intensity induction protocol was further abbreviated in 2018 to decrease toxicity and expediate ASCT by incorporating rituximab, procarbazine, and only 2 doses of high-dose methotrexate and 1 cycle of high-dose cytarabine before consolidation with thiotepa-busulfan conditioning. Progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were determined using the Kaplan-Meier method. RESULTS: Among 71 patients with median age 58 years (range 26-72), ASCT was completed in 56 (79%), with the transplantation rate among patients > 60 years old increasing by 30% following the abbreviation of induction therapy. With median follow-up time 3.9 years, 4-year PFS and OS were 69% (95% CI 56%-79%) and 80% (95% CI 67%-88%) for all patients and 75% (95% CI 57%-86%) and 85% (95% CI 68%-93%) for ASCT recipients, respectively. There was 1 death due to treatment-related mortality during induction and none after ASCT, including among 17 transplanted patients > 60 years old. CONCLUSION: An abbreviated induction regimen followed by thiotepa-busulfan-based ASCT achieves high transplantation rates with low risks of relapse and treatment-related mortality, thereby providing an effective treatment strategy for PCNSL.
N,N',N''-Triethylenethiophosphoramide (thioTEPA) is a polyfunctional, organophosphorus alkylating agent that has been a primary treatment of multiple solid malignancies for many years and more recently as part of conditioning regimens prior to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for a variety of hematologic malignancies. In vivo, thioTEPA is quickly metabolized to N,N',N''-triethylenephosphoramide (TEPA). ThioTEPA and TEPA have similar alkylating activity and both exhibit outstanding central nervous system penetration. Therefore, it is possible and desirable to monitor both compounds in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).This chapter describes a method to measure both compounds simultaneously. ThioTEPA and TEPA are extracted with solvent from plasma and CSF by the addition of deuterated internal standards prepared in methanol. Chromatographic separation is attained using a C(18) column and mass spectrometry which is performed in the positive ion mode. Herein, we describe a fast, accurate, and sensitive assay to quantify both compounds in plasma and CSF by turbulent flow LC-MS/MS which allows for fast and accurate therapeutic drug monitoring and timely dose modifications.
We describe an unusual case of pruritus after intravesical thiotepa, and diaphoresis, shortness of breath, chills and pruritus following intravesical doxorubicin therapy. Such generalized allergic reactions occur uncommonly after bladder instillation of thiotepa or doxorubicin.
BACKGROUND: Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) is the only curative treatment for several pediatric non-malignant disorders. A widely used conditioning backbone is busulfan, fludarabine, and rabbit anti-thymocyte globulin (rATG). Thiotepa has improved engraftment when added to this regimen, however the minimum effective dose (MED) of thiotepa to achieve engraftment while minimizing toxicities has not been well established. OBJECTIVES: The primary objective of this prospective feasibility study was to determine the MED of thiotepa (5mg/kg) in combination with reduced-dose busulfan, fludarabine or cyclophosphamide, and rATG required to achieve engraftment in >90% of HSCT recipients for non-malignant disorders with acceptable toxicity. RESULTS: Six patients who received fully matched HSCT were enrolled. Patient diagnoses included Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (n = 1), CD40L deficiency (n = 1), sickle cell disease (n = 2), autoinflammatory syndrome (n = 1), and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (n = 1). All six patients achieved engraftment prior to Day +42 and five patients had stable full donor engraftment. Two of the six patients (33%) developed acute GVHD and/or chronic GHVD, both of whom had sickle cell disease. At a median follow-up of 2.25 years post-transplant, all patients were alive without evidence of disease recurrence. None of the patients experienced grade 4 or 5 toxicities. Three out of six patients (50%) developed grade 3 adverse events. Neurocognitive functioning of children under 10 years of age was not adversely affected by this regimen. CONCLUSION: This approach shows acceptable toxicity and reliable engraftment in children with non-malignant disorders receiving related or unrelated HLA-matched transplants.
BACKGROUND: Thiothepa is a cytostatic agent used in managing solid malignancies, and also as conditioning treatment before hematopoietic stem cell transplantation [HSCT]. This systematic review summarizes evidence on its effectiveness and safety, in patients with central nervous system [CNS] lymphoma. METHODS: We searched 3 databases for clinical studies. When feasible, we performed meta-analyses. RESULTS: We identified 13 eligible studies, none of which with a priori controls. So data synthesis focused on the 226 patients who received thiotepa. Based on pooled estimates, 75.9% of thiotepa-treated patients achieved a complete remission (95% confidence interval [CI] = 67.5-82.8), and 61.7% had a progression-free survival for up to 125 months post-treatment (95% CI = 49.4-72.7). However, 25.5% relapsed, 24.6% experienced infection, and 13.2% experienced neurotoxicity. DISCUSSION: Thiotepa-based conditioning followed by HSCT may be effective in most CNS lymphoma patients, with a manageable toxicity profile. But adequately powered randomized trials are needed to better evaluate and isolate the effects of thiotepa.
We report results of a thiotepa-based conditioning in haploidentical stem cell transplantation (haplo-SCT) with posttransplant cyclophosphamide (PT-CY) and antithymocyte globulin (ATG), for unmanipulated peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) transplants, in 80 patients with hematological malignancies. Patients in complete remission (CR) received a thiotepa-busulfan-fludarabine (TBF) regimen, while patients with relapsed/refractory (R/R) malignancies received a sequential regimen consisting of thiotepa-etoposide-cyclophosphamide (TEC) and reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC). The median age was 52 (range, 17-72) years, 44% patients had R/R disease at transplant, and the median follow-up was 417 (range, 180-1595) days. The median days to neutrophil engraftment was 17 (range, 12-34). The cumulative incidences (CI) of acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) grade III to IV, severe chronic GVHD, nonrelapse mortality (NRM), and relapse were 16%, 16%, 26, and 26%, respectively. The 2-year overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) were 53% and 47%, respectively. There were no significant differences between the patients in CR and R/R patients in terms of engraftment, GVHD, NRM, relapse, OS, or DFS. We conclude that thiotepa-based regimen with PT-CY can be modified with PBSC and ATG, still providing low toxicity, protection against GVHD, and low relapse incidence. Particularly encouraging are the results with the modification to sequential regimen in R/R patients.
Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is a rare extranodal non-Hodgkin lymphoma for which standard treatment has yet to be established. High-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) is a suitable consolidation strategy for patients who respond to induction chemotherapy. The purpose of this study was to compare the outcome and toxicity profile of the combination of busulfan, cyclophosphamide, and etoposide (BuCyE) with that of the combination of thiotepa, busulfan, and cyclophosphamide (TBC) as conditioning regimens of upfront ASCT for consolidation therapy in PCNSL. The PCNSL registry data set, prospectively collected from March 1993 to May 2017 at Asan Medical Center, was reviewed retrospectively. Patients with objective response to induction chemotherapy who received BuCyE or TBC as conditioning regimen for ASCT were included in the analysis. Primary endpoints were overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS). Among 241 patients with a diagnosis of PCNSL, 53 received ASCT as upfront consolidation therapy with TBC (28 patients) or BuCyE (25 patients) as conditioning regimen. No median OS or PFS was reached in the TBC group, while the BuCyE group reached a median OS of 4.9 years (p = 0.02) and median PFS of 1.1 years (p = 0.007). The incidence of oral mucositis, nausea, and vomiting was higher with TBC than BuCyE. The median admission duration and days to engraftment were similar between the two groups. Despite the greater incidence of adverse events, TBC showed better outcomes than BuCyE in terms of survival.
Total body irradiation (TBI)/cyclophosphamide (CY) is a standard-of-care conditioning regimen in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) for pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). This study sought to identify whether the addition of thiotepa (TT) to TBI/CY improves HSCT outcomes for pediatric patients with ALL. A retrospective analysis was performed on 347 pediatric ALL patients who underwent HSCT between 1995 and 2015, with 242 receiving TBI/CY/TT and 105 patients receiving TBI/CY. There were no statistical differences in age, donor source, or complete remission status between the 2 groups. Comparison of the TBI/CY/TT versus TBI/CY groups demonstrated no difference in transplant-related mortality at 1 (11% versus 11%), 5 (13% versus 16%), or 10 years (16% versus 16%). There was lower relapse in the TBI/CY/TT group at 1 (14% versus 26%), 5 (24% versus 36%), 10 (26% versus 37%), and 15 years (26% versus 37%) (P= .02) but was not statistically significant on multivariate analysis. The TBI/CY/TT group showed a trend toward improved disease-free survival (DFS) at 5 (59% versus 47%), 10 (56% versus 46%), and 15 years (49% versus 40%) (P = .05) but was not statistically significant on multivariate analysis. Comparing overall survival at 5 (62% versus 53%), 10 (57% versus 50%), and 15 years (50% versus 44%) demonstrated no statistical difference between the 2 groups. The addition of thiotepa to TBI/CY demonstrated no increase in transplant-related mortality for pediatric ALL HSCT but was unable to demonstrate significant benefit in disease control. Minimal residual disease status remained the key risk factor impacting both relapse and DFS. More studies are warranted to better clarify the benefits of using thiotepa in conditioning for ALL HSCT.
The use of thiotepa-treosulfan-fludarabine conditioning regimen and peripheral blood stem cell grafts is associated with improved outcomes of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HCT) in patients with high-risk thalassemia major. However, there remains a need to identify predictors of poor outcomes in this cohort to further optimize outcomes. The Endothelial Activation and Stress Index (EASIX) is a biomarker shown to predict survival in various settings, including graft-versus-host disease, veno-occlusive disease, and nonrelapse mortality following allogeneic HCT. In this retrospective analysis, we evaluated the role of EASIX-PreTx (measured before conditioning therapy) as a biomarker in predicting day +100 transplantation-related mortality (TRM+100) in 281 patients with thalassemia major who underwent HCT with a uniform conditioning regimen using thiotepa-treosulfan-fludarabine at our center between January 2012 and December 2019. The median patient age was 9 years (range, 1 to 25 years), and 109 (38.8%) were females. According to the Pesaro classification (with Vellore modification), 3 patients (1.1%) were class I, 34 (12.1%) were class II, 134 (47.7%) were class III low risk, and 110 (39.1%) were class III high risk. Stem cell donors were matched sibling (n = 218; 77.6%), matched related nonsibling (n = 23; 8.2%), or matched unrelated (n = 40; 14.2%). Five patients (1.8%) received a bone marrow graft, and the others received a peripheral blood stem cell graft. Thirty-eight patients (13.5%) had TRM+100. EASIX-PreTx was available for 184 patients (65.5%). The median EASIX-PreTx was significantly higher in patients with TRM+100 compared with those without TRM+100 (1.09 versus .75; P = .008). An EASIX-PreTx cutoff of .85 had 70.4% sensitivity and 62% specificity for predicting TRM+100. The TRM+100 for patients with EASIX-PreTx >.85 was significantly higher than those with EASIX <.85 (24.4% versus 7.5%; P = .003). In a uniform subgroup of class III patients undergoing allogeneic HCT (n = 156), EASIX-PreTx was an independent predictor of TRM+100.
BACKGROUND: Outcome of high risk neuroblastoma (NBL) remains unsatisfactory in spite of intensive treatment efforts. Consolidation with high-dose (HD) chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) has been intensified with tandem and triple cycles with promising results. Our purpose was to improve the outcome with two or three HD-consolidations. METHODS: Thirty six children with high risk NBL, diagnosed 1995-2010, had intensive induction and surgery, and were stratified to single, tandem or triple HD-therapy and ASCT, followed by local irradiation and cis-retinoic acid. In inoperable patients surgery was facilitated by preoperative HD-melphalan. Long-term outcome of our old cohort from 1987-1994 was updated. RESULTS: Ten year event-free survival (EFS) from diagnosis was 0.44+/-0.10 of the old and 0.43+/-0.085 of the new cohort. EFS from the last ASCT was 0.53 +/-0.12 and 0.48+/-0.091, respectively. Preoperative HD-melphalan rendered 73% of bulky primaries operable in the new cohort. The 5-yr EFS from ASCT was 0.46+/-0.15 for single and 0.73+/-0.15 for tandem ASCT (P = 0.19). All triple ASCT patients, selected by poor/slow response, relapsed or died. CONCLUSIONS: Thiotepa- and melphalan based HD regimens, with or without total body irradiation (TBI), appeared to give an outcome comparable to major NBL study groups with acceptable toxicity. Tandem HD therapy gave a 5-year EFS of 73%, whereas a third HD consolidation did not offer any additional advantage for ultra high risk patients with slow response. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2012; 59: 1190-1197. (c) 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
INTRODUCTION: The optimal intensity of myeloablation with a reduced-toxicity conditioning regimen to decrease relapse rate after allogeneic stem-cell transplantation without increasing transplant-related mortality (TRM) has not been well established. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We compared outcomes between 5 mg/kg (T5) and 10 mg/kg (T10) thiotepa-based conditioning regimens in 29 adults who underwent allogeneic stem-cell transplantation for hematologic malignancies. RESULTS: After a median follow-up of 11 months, TRM was 0% and 14% at 100 days and 1 year, respectively, with TRM observed only in the T5 group (P = .016). The relapse incidence at 1 year was 20%. No patient had disease in first complete remission at the time of transplantation. At 1 year, progression-free and overall survival were 30% versus 87% (P = .012) and 46% versus 87% (P = .008) in the T5 and T10 groups, respectively. In univariate and multivariate analysis, only age at transplantation and total dose of thiotepa had a significant impact on TRM, overall, and progression-free survival. CONCLUSION: Patients deemed fit to receive T10-based conditioning for allogeneic stem-cell transplantation to treat high-risk hematologic malignancies had better overall and progression-free survival than those who received T5 with no additional toxicities. Patients should be stratified before conditioning, and those judged fit should receive T10, while the others should consider alternative reduced-intensity conditioning regimens.
This study aimed to compare the real-life results of TECAM, a thiotepa-based conditioning regimen consisting of thiotepa (40 mg/m(2) days -5 to -2), etoposide (200 mg/m(2) days -6 to -3), cytarabine (200 mg/m(2) days -4 to -1), cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg day -3), and melphalan (60 mg/m(2) days -2 to -1) with that of the conventional carmustine-based regimen BEAM. We reviewed 125 consecutive patients who underwent a first autologous transplantation (ASCT) for B-cell lymphomas at a large tertiary transplantation center between 1999 and 2014. TECAM (n=65) and BEAM (n=60) had comparable results (3yPFS 49 vs 62%, P=0.16; 3yOS 64 vs 71%, P=0.44; TRM 1.6 vs 5%, P=0.35) without a difference in toxicity or time to engraftment. Notably, comparable outcomes were observed even though patients treated with TECAM were older (55 vs 44) and had a trend towards more prior lines of therapy (>2 prior lines: 43 vs 27%, P=0.08). In this regard, 23% of TECAM patients were over the age of 65 yet could withstand therapy with similar results to younger patients. We conclude that, replacing carmustine by thiotepa and cyclophosphamide for ASCT conditioning, has comparable efficacy and safety profiles with a possible advantage in older patients.
Reversible alopecia is a commonly observed, important and distressing complication of chemotherapy. Permanent alopecia, however, is rare after standard-dose therapy, but has occasionally been observed after high-dose chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, thiotepa and carboplatin (CTC). We evaluated the relationships between total exposure to these three compounds and their different metabolites in the high-dose CTC regimen, and the subsequent development of irreversible alopecia. Twenty-four patients received two or three courses of high-dose CTC, each followed by peripheral blood progenitor cell transplantation. Plasma levels of cyclophosphamide, its active metabolite 4-hydroxycyclophosphamide, thiotepa, its active metabolite tepa, and carboplatin were determined, and the area-under-the-plasma concentration-versus-time curves (AUC) of the compounds were calculated. Eight of the 24 patients included in the study developed permanent alopecia, while seven had normal hair regrowth and nine patients developed incomplete and/or thin hair regrowth. The carboplatin AUC and the summed AUC of thiotepa and tepa were both significantly associated with increasing irreversibility of hair loss. These results suggest that high exposure to carboplatin and the sum of the thiotepa and tepa exposure may lead to the development of permanent alopecia. This knowledge could guide therapeutic drug monitoring in order to prevent the occurrence of permanent alopecia and thereby improve the patients' quality of life.
Total body irradiation (TBI) at myeloablative doses is superior to chemotherapy-based regimens in young patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT). However, in elderly and unfit patients, in whom reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) regimens are preferred, whether a TBI-based or a chemotherapy-based approach is better is unexplored. Thiotepa can be used as part of ALL conditioning regimens. The current study aimed to compare transplantation outcomes after RIC with TBI-based or thiotepa-based regimens in patients with ALL. The study cohort comprised patients aged >/=40 years undergoing allo-HSCT for ALL in first complete remission between 2000 and 2020 who received an RIC regimen containing either TBI (4 to 6 Gy) or thiotepa. We identified a total of 265 patients, including 117 who received a TBI-based RIC regimen and 148 who received a thiotepa-based RIC regimen. Univariate analysis revealed no significant differences in the following transplantation outcomes for TBI versus thiotepa: relapse, 23% versus 28% (P = .24); nonrelapse mortality, 20% versus 26% (P = .61); leukemia-free survival, 57% versus 46% (P = .12); overall survival, 67% versus 56% (P = .18); graft-versus-host disease (GVHD]/relapse-free survival, 45% versus 38% (P = .21); grade II-IV acute GVHD, 30% in both groups (P = .84); grade III-IV acute GVHD, 9% versus 10% (P = .89). The sole exception was the incidence of chronic GVHD, which was higher in the recipients of TBI-based regimens (43% versus 29%; P = .03). However, multivariate analysis revealed no differences in transplantation outcomes between the 2 groups. In patients aged >/=40 years receiving RIC, use of a thiotepa-based regimen may represent a valid alternative to TBI-based regimens, as no differences were observed in the main transplantation outcomes.
BACKGROUND: High-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation (HDC-ASCT) is a therapeutic option for patients with primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL). To the authors' knowledge, data are limited regarding its use among patients in first complete remission (CR1) with the CNS-directed conditioning regimen of thiotepa, busulfan, and cyclophosphamide (TBC). METHODS: A retrospective analysis of patients with PCNSL in CR1 who underwent transplantation using a TBC-based conditioning regimen at 2 academic institutions was performed. RESULTS: Forty-six consecutive patients who underwent HDC-ASCT while in CR1 were identified. The most common induction regimen was high-dose methotrexate plus temozolomide and rituximab (59%). No patients received whole-brain radiotherapy. A total of 40 patients (87%) received cytarabine before undergoing ASCT as either induction intensification, early consolidation therapy, or mobilization. The median time from diagnosis to transplantation was 6 months (range, 4-15 months). The median age of the patients at the time of transplantation was 59 years (range, 27-69 years). With a median follow-up of 2.7 years after ASCT (range, 6 months-7.5 years), the Kaplan-Meier estimates of 2-year overall survival and progression-free survival were 95% (95% confidence interval [95% CI], 80%-99%) and 92% (95% CI, 77%-97%), respectively. The most common toxicities were severe mucositis (35%) and bacterial infections occurring within 100 days of transplantation (35%). The estimated 2-year nonrecurrence mortality rate was 2.9% (95% CI, 0.2%-13.4%). CONCLUSIONS: HDC-ASCT with a CNS-directed conditioning regimen such as TBC should be considered for patients with PCNSL who are in CR1 because this approach is associated with encouraging disease control and survival in this select patient population. Cancer 2017;123:3073-79. (c) 2017 American Cancer Society.
