Ticlopidine is an antithrombotic prodrug of the thienotetrahydropyridine family. For platelet inhibition it has to undergo oxidative ring-opening by cytochrome P450 enzymes. The resulting thiol reacts with a cysteine residue of the purinergic P2Y(12) receptor on thrombocytes resulting in covalent receptor blockade. Ticlopidine in its intact, not-metabolized form was previously shown to inhibit ecto-nucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase-1 (NTPDase1, also known as cluster of differentiation (CD) 39). CD39 catalyzes the extracellular hydrolysis of ATP via ADP to AMP, which is further hydrolyzed by ecto-5'-nucleotidase (CD73) to adenosine. CD39 inhibition has been proposed as a novel strategy to increase the extracellular concentration of antiproliferative ATP, while decreasing immunosuppressive and cancer-promoting adenosine levels. In the present study, we performed an extensive structure-activity relationship (SAR) analysis of ticlopidine derivatives and analogs as CD39 inhibitors followed by an in-depth characterization of selected compounds. Altogether 74 compounds were synthesized, 41 of which are new, not previously described in literature. Benzotetrahydropyridines, in which the metabolically labile thiophene is replaced by a benzene ring, were discovered as a new class of allosteric CD39 inhibitors.
In 6 normal volunteers given single oral doses of 250,500 and 1000 mg ticlopidine (T), the peak plasma level of unchanged drug was reached after about 2 h. There was no correlation between the plasma T level and its inhibitory effect on platelet function, expressed as % inhibition of ADP-induced aggregation. By means of HPLC and GC/MS significant concentrations of T were demonstrated in washed red cells, platelets and neutrophils, with a marked difference in the time course of the appearance of cell-associated drug. The time course of platelet-associated T very accurately fitted that of the antiaggregatory activity. After subacute oral administration (250 mg b.d. for 7 days), the maximum effect on platelet function was observed after 3 to 4 days, when a significant concentration of platelet-associated T had been reached. The pharmacological effect persisted as long as drug was detectable in platelet. An in vitro study strongly suggested that the antiaggregating effect was retained by treated washed platelets but not by treated plasma. It is suggested that the platelet compartment represents the pharmacological target of T via a specific uptake system.
Ticlopidine, clopidogrel, and prasugrel are thienopyridine prodrugs that inhibit adenosine-5'-diphosphate (ADP)-mediated platelet aggregation in vivo. These compounds are converted to thiol-containing active metabolites through a corresponding thiolactone. The 3 compounds differ in their metabolic pathways to their active metabolites in humans. Whereas ticlopidine and clopidogrel are metabolized to their thiolactones in the liver by cytochromes P450, prasugrel proceeds to its thiolactone following hydrolysis by carboxylesterase 2 during absorption, and a portion of prasugrel's active metabolite is also formed by intestinal CYP3A. Both ticlopidine and clopidogrel are subject to major competing metabolic pathways to inactive metabolites. Thus, varying efficiencies in the formation of active metabolites affect observed effects on the onset of action and extent of inhibition of platelet aggregation (IPA). Knowledge of the CYP-dependent formation of ticlopidine and clopidogrel thiolactones helps explain some of the observed drug-drug interactions with these molecules and, more important, the role of CYP2C19 genetic polymorphism on the pharmacokinetics of and pharmacodynamic response to clopidogrel. The lack of drug interaction potential and the absence of CYP2C19 genetic effect result in a predictable response to thienopyridine antiplatelet therapy with prasugrel. Current literature shows that greater ADP-mediated IPA is associated with significantly better clinical outcomes for patients with acute coronary syndrome.
A metabolite of ticlopidine, PCR 3787, in concentrations from 25-200 micrograms/ml inhibited the aggregation of human platelets, induced by different amounts of collagen. The effect of PCR 3787 on PG formation was tested in rat platelets. After incubation with PCR 3787, platelets were labelled with 1-14C arachidonic acid and aggregation induced with collagen. The sum of the PG formed (PGF2 alpha + PGE2 + PGD2) was higher in the platelets incubated with PCR 3787 than in the controls. The aggregation-inhibiting effects of PGI2 (1 ng/ml) and PGD2 (10 ng/ml) on human platelets were enhanced by the addition of PCR 3787 (100 micrograms/ml). A stable derivative of PGI2, ciloprost was used. These results indicate, that part of the aggregation-inhibiting effect of ticlopidine can be attributed to the formation of this metabolite.
In this report we describe an elderly lady, who after 27 days of ticlopidine treatment developed severe pancytopenia and gram (-) septicemia. No clinical response was obtained with an eight days course of empirical broad spectrum antibiotics, after which granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF, filgrastim) added to her regimen. In a period of seven days her neutrophil count was normal and she had recovered from septicemia. Twelve weeks after discharge she is fine and her blood parameters are all normal.
AIMS: The purpose of this clinical study was to evaluate the effects of a ticlopidine/aspirin combination on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of sibrafiban and the tolerability of the combination therapy METHODS: Thirty-eight healthy male volunteers were randomized to receive one of the following treatments for 7 days: sibrafiban (n = 12), ticlopidine/aspirin (n = 12), or the combination treatment sibrafiban/ticlopidine/aspirin (n = 14). Concentrations of the active metabolite of sibrafiban, Ro 44-3888, in plasma and urine were determined by column-switching liquid chromatography combined with tandem mass spectrometry. The pharmacodynamics of sibrafiban and ticlopidine/aspirin were examined by measuring the inhibition of ADP- or collagen-induced platelet aggregation. RESULTS: The addition of ticlopidine/aspirin to sibrafiban did not significantly alter the pharmacokinetic parameters of Ro 44-3888. the geometric mean ratio for AUC(0,12h) was 110 (95% CI 0.82, 1.22). Separately, sibrafiban and ticlopidine/aspirin inhibited ADP-and collagen-induced platelet aggregation and the effects of the two treatments were additive. For example, the average inhibition of ADP-induced platelet aggregation over 12 h was 42% in the sibrafiban treated group, 55% in the ticlopidine/aspirin group and 69% in the sibrafiban/ticlopidine group. The bleeding time was prolonged in the treatments with ticlopidine/aspirin (8.1 min) and sibrafiban/ticlopidine/aspirin (8. 6 min) compared with sibrafiban alone (3.5 min). CONCLUSIONS: This study shows a significant pharmacodynamic interaction between sibrafiban and ticlopidine/aspirin. Consequently, the simultaneous administration of sibrafiban and ticlopidine/aspirin should be carefully monitored to ensure the patient's coverage with an antiplatelet drug without exposure to an excessive bleeding risk.
Different pathological conditions, including viral infections and cancer, can have a massive impact on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), causing severe damage to the cell and exacerbating the disease. In particular, coronavirus infections, including SARS coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), responsible for COVID-19, cause ER stress as a consequence of the enormous amounts of viral glycoproteins synthesized, the perturbation of ER homeostasis and the modification of ER membranes. Therefore, ER has a central role in the viral life cycle, thus representing one of the Achilles' heels on which to focus therapeutic intervention. On the other hand, prolonged ER stress has been demonstrated to promote many pro-tumoral attributes in cancer cells, having a key role in tumor growth, metastasis and response to therapies. In this report, adopting a repurposing approach of approved drugs, we identified the antiplatelet agent ticlopidine as an interferent of the unfolded protein response (UPR) via sigma receptors (SRs) modulation. The promising results obtained suggest the potential use of ticlopidine to counteract ER stress induced by viral infections, such as COVID-19, and cancer.
Ticlopidine is an inhibitor of platelet action that has been used in the treatment of a variety of disease states in which platelets play a prominent role. Studies in animals and man have demonstrated that ticlopidine is a potent inhibitor of platelet aggregation induced by adenosine diphosphate (ADP), and variably inhibits aggregation due to collagen, adrenaline (epinephrine), arachidonic acid, thrombin, and platelet activating factor. Inhibition of platelet aggregation is both dose- and time-related, with its onset of activity being 24 to 48 hours, its maximal activity occurring after 3 to 5 days, and its activity still being present 72 hours after a final dose. Ticlopidine also inhibits the release reaction of platelets, prolongs bleeding time, reduces plasma levels of platelet factor 4 and beta-thromboglobulin in patients in whom these proteins are elevated, and may also inhibit platelet adhesion, increase red cell filtrability and decrease whole blood viscosity. In a large number of animal models, ticlopidine markedly inhibits thrombus formation or graft occlusion. Ticlopidine is well absorbed after oral administration. It is extensively metabolised and at least one of its metabolites is pharmacologically active. Therapeutic trials in patients with chronic arterial occlusion due to thrombangitis obliterans or arteriosclerosis obliterans, post-myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular thromboembolic disease, subarachnoid haemorrhage, vascular shunts or fistulas for haemodialysis, and sickle cell disease have shown promise for the use of ticlopidine. However, trials of patients with intermittent claudication, angina pectoris, diabetes mellitus with microvascular disease, aortocoronary bypass grafts, and vascular prostheses have had conflicting results or have shown an unfavourable side effect profile. Further studies are clearly required to establish the role of ticlopidine in many of these areas, some of which are already in progress. Overall, side effects occur in 10 to 15% of patients receiving ticlopidine. The most common side effects are gastrointestinal disturbances and skin rashes. Neither of these necessarily require discontinuation of therapy in most patients. Agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and cholestatic jaundice have also been reported. Bleeding is infrequent except possibly in patients receiving ticlopidine prior to some surgical procedures.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) Adverse Event Reporting System (AERS), familiarly known as "MedWatch," is the nation's primary tool for postmarket pharmaceutical safety surveillance. This system relies on adverse events voluntarily reported by health care providers and consumers either directly to the FDA or to drug manufacturers, which are required to prepare and forward the information to the agency. Little is known about how frequently adverse events are reported. Previous estimates range from 1 to 31% depending on the event, drug, and time period. We used published incidence studies to calculate reporting rates for hemorrhage, emergency hospitalization, and venous thromboembolism (VTE) associated with four drugs. We estimated annual reporting rates of 1.07% for 33,171 emergency hospitalizations of patients older than 65 years associated with warfarin, 0.9% for 13,363 hospitalizations of clopidogrel and ticlopidine, and 1.02% for an estimated 67,200 hemorrhage cases associated with warfarin. We also estimated a 9-year reporting rate of 2.3% for VTE associated with thalidomide. The incidence of these hematologic adverse drug events is high and reporting rates are low, and near the lower boundary of the 1 to 15% range seen for other events.
We investigated the effects of probucol and ticlopidine on circulating levels of platelet activation markers, microparticles, soluble selectins, and malondialdehyde-low density lipoprotein (MDA-LDL) in hyperlipidemic patients with or without type 2 diabetes. There were significant differences in the levels of CD62P, PAC-1, annexin V, PDMP, MDMP, sP-selectin, sE-selectin and MDA-LDL between the hyperlipidemic patients and the controls. In particular, these markers were significantly increased in hyperlipidemic patients who had type 2 diabetes. In the hyperlipidemic patients with diabetes, MDA-LDL was decreased by both monotherapy with probucol and combination therapy (probucol and ticlopidine). In these patients, CD62P, PAC-1, annexin V, MDMP, PDMP, sP-selectin, and sE-selectin were also significantly decreased after treatment. The decreases of CD62P, PAC-1, annexin V, PDMP and sP-selectin were greater combination therapy than with monotherapy. These findings suggest that administration of probucol and ticlopidine to hyperlipidemic patients with type 2 diabetes may help to prevent the development of cardiovascular complications caused by modified LDL, selectins, or activated platelets and monocytes.
BACKGROUND: Sub-acute thrombosis is a serious complication of coronary artery stenting. Clopidogrel plus aspirin is the accepted prophylactic regimen, but has yet to be proven superior to ticlopidine plus aspirin, and a new regimen combining cilostazol and aspirin has been introduced. METHODS: We conducted a meta-analysis of all trials that compared >or=2 oral anti-thrombotic strategies in patients undergoing coronary stent placement to determine which treatment optimally prevents adverse cardiac events in the 30 days following stent insertion. We used meta-regression to compare all strategies to a shared control strategy: ticlopidine plus aspirin. We also compared randomized trials to historically controlled and other non-randomized trials. We conducted sensitivity analysis and subgroup analysis to assess for possible heterogeneity. RESULTS: In comparison to ticlopidine plus aspirin the odds-ratios for cardiac events, with 95% confidence intervals were: aspirin alone, 4.29 (3.09-5.97), coumadin plus aspirin, 2.65 (2.18-3.21), clopidogrel plus aspirin, 1.06 (0.86-1.31), cilostazol plus aspirin, 0.73 (0.47-1.14). Among trials that compared clopidogrel plus aspirin to ticlopidine plus aspirin, historically controlled trials were statistically distinct from randomized trials. The analysis of cilostazol was sensitive to the small size of the included studies. CONCLUSIONS: Neither clopidogrel plus aspirin nor cilostazol plus aspirin can be statistically distinguished from ticlopidine plus aspirin for the prevention of adverse cardiac events in the 30 days after stenting. A randomized trial including cilostazol is warranted.
BACKGROUND: The combination of a thienopyridine and aspirin has become the standard of care after intracoronary stenting. Clopidogrel appears to be better tolerated than ticlopidine but may be associated with more adverse cardiac events. We assessed the tolerability and efficacy of 2 weeks of therapy with ticlopidine and aspirin in comparison to clopidogrel and aspirin after coronary stent implantation. METHODS: Patients with successful intracoronary stent implantation at our institution were randomly assigned, in addition to aspirin, to receive either ticlopidine or clopidogrel. Loading doses were administered immediately after the procedure, and the drugs were continued for 2 weeks. RESULTS: Three hundred seven patients were randomly assigned: 154 patients to clopidogrel and 153 to the ticlopidine group. The primary end point of early drug discontinuation occurred in 5 patients (3.3%) in the ticlopidine group and 1 patient (0.6%) in the clopidogrel group (P =.121). Within 30 days, thrombotic stent occlusion occurred in 1 patient (0.7%) in the ticlopidine group and 3 patients (1.9%) in the clopidogrel group (P =.623). A major adverse cardiac event occurred in 3 patients (approximately 1.9%; P = 1.00) in each group. CONCLUSIONS: There was a nonsignificant trend to improved tolerability of a 2-week regimen of clopidogrel and aspirin when compared with ticlopidine and aspirin in patients undergoing intracoronary stent implantation. The combination of clopidogrel and aspirin results in a comparably low incidence of major adverse cardiac events when compared with ticlopidine and aspirin.
OBJECTIVES: It is unknown whether a therapeutic combination of aspirin (ASA) and ticlopidine might effectively decrease activation of hemostasis. BACKGROUND: Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), rotational atherectomy and stent implantation are procedures that fracture or ablate endothelium and plaque, a situation that activates hemostasis. METHODS: In 85 patients undergoing PTCA for a 77.8 +/- 1% stenosis, we measured markers of coagulation and platelet activation (thrombin-antithrombin complexes [TAT], prothrombin fragment 1 + 2 [F1 + 2] serotonin and the presence of circulating activated platelets reacting with monoclonal antibodies against glycoproteins exposed on platelet membranes). Blood samples were drawn from a peripheral vein and from the coronary ostium before the procedures. Both immediately and 10 min after angioplasty, and 10 min afterward, samples were collected from a probing catheter (0.018 in, [0.46 cm]) positioned beyond the stenosis. All patients were being treated with antianginal drugs and ASA, 250 mg/day. Seventy of them had taken ticlopidine, 250 mg, twice daily for < or = 1 day (< or = 24 h) (n = 28) or for > or = 3 days (> or = 72 h) (n = 42). Heparin (150 U/kg) was administered before angioplasty. Thirty patients underwent PTCA; 15 of them were not treated with ticlopidine and 15 were given ticlopidine (> or = 72 h). Thirty-five patients had stent implantation, 20 rotational atherectomy. RESULTS: Before and during the procedures, there was greater thrombin generation (expressed by higher TAT and F1 + 2 plasma levels) in patients not taking ticlopidine or taking it for < or = 24 h (p < 0.05). Platelet activation and plasma serotonin levels were also significantly higher in the no ticlopidine or < or = 24-h ticlopidine groups. CONCLUSIONS: The combined use of ticlopidine, ASA and heparin effectively controls activation of coagulation in patients with stable or unstable angina undergoing coronary dilation.
PURPOSE: We assessed possible drug interactions of tramadol given concomitantly with the potent CYP2B6 inhibitor ticlopidine, alone or together with the potent CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein inhibitor itraconazole. METHODS: In a randomized, placebo-controlled cross-over study, 12 healthy subjects ingested 50 mg of tramadol after 4 days of pretreatment with either placebo, ticlopidine (250 mg twice daily) or ticlopidine plus itraconazole (200 mg once daily). Plasma and urine concentrations of tramadol and its active metabolite O-desmethyltramadol (M1) were monitored over 48 h and 24 h, respectively. RESULTS: Ticlopidine increased the mean area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC0-infinity) of tramadol by 2.0-fold (90 % confidence interval (CI) 1.6-2.4; p < 0.001) and Cmax by 1.4-fold (p < 0.001), and reduced its oral and renal clearance (p < 0.01). Ticlopidine reduced the AUC0-3 of M1 (p < 0.001) and the ratio of the AUC0-infinity of M1 to that of tramadol, but did not influence the AUC0-infinity of M1. Tramadol or M1 pharmacokinetics did not differ between the ticlopidine alone and ticlopidine plus itraconazole phases. CONCLUSIONS: Ticlopidine increased exposure to tramadol, reduced its renal clearance and inhibited the formation of M1, most likely via inhibition of CYP2B6 and/or CYP2D6. The addition of itraconazole to ticlopidine did not modify the outcome of the drug interaction. Concomitant clinical use of ticlopidine and tramadol may enhance the risk of serotonergic effects, especially when higher doses of tramadol are used.
BACKGROUND: Ticlopidine has been shown to reduce the incidence of stent thrombosis compared with warfarin, but it may cause serious hematological side effects. Clopidogrel, a new thienopyridine derivative, may be a safe alternative to ticlopidine. The aim of this study was to compare the safety and efficacy of clopidogrel and aspirin with those of ticlopidine and aspirin in patients undergoing coronary stent implantation. METHODS AND RESULTS: The population of this study consisted of 2 groups: patients who underwent coronary stenting and were treated with ticlopidine and aspirin (TA group, n=1406), and patients who underwent coronary stenting followed by treatment with clopidogrel and aspirin (CA group, n=283). At 1-month follow-up, there was no difference in stent thrombosis (1.5% versus 1.4%, P=1.0) or major adverse cardiac events (3.1% versus 2.4%, P=0. 85) between the TA and CA groups, respectively. The probability of any side effect (neutropenia, diarrhea, rash) was significantly higher in the TA group (10.6% versus 5.3%, P=0.006; relative risk, 0. 53; CI, 0.32 to 0.86). CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that clopidogrel may be an effective pharmacological regimen after coronary stent implantation. Furthermore, the simpler dosing regimen, the absence of neutropenia, and the lower frequency of other side effects make it a safe alternative to ticlopidine.
