Among the strategies for bioavailability improvement of poorly soluble drugs, co-amorphous systems have revealed to have a significant impact in the increase of the aqueous solubility of the drug, and at the same time increasing the amorphous state stability and dissolution rate when compared with the neat drug. Tolbutamide (TBM) is an oral hypoglycemic drug largely used in the treatment of type II Mellitus diabetes. TBM is a class II drug according to the Biopharmaceutical Classification System, meaning that it has low solubility and higher permeability. The aim of this study was to synthesize a co-amorphous material of tolbutamide (TBM) with tromethamine (TRIS). Density functional theory (DFT), allowed to study the structural, electronic, and thermodynamic properties, as well as solvation effects. In same theory level, several interactions tests were performed to obtain the most thermodynamically favorable drug-coformer intermolecular interactions. The vibrational spectra (mid infrared and Raman spectroscopy) are in accordance with the theoretical studies, showing that the main molecular interactions are due to the carbonyl, sulfonyl, and amide groups of TMB and the alcohol and amine groups of TRIS. X-ray powder diffraction was used to study the physical stability in dry condition at 25  degrees C of the co-amorphous system, indicating that the material remained in an amorphous state up to 90 days. Differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetric results showed a high increase of the Tg when compared with the amorphous neat drug, from 4.3  degrees C to 83.7  degrees C, which generally translated into good physical stability. Solubility studies demonstrated an increase in the solubility of TBM by 2.5 fold when compared with its crystalline counterpart.
Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is related to two main histological pancreas anomalies: focal adenomatous hyperplasia and diffuse beta-cell hypersecretion. Pharmacological tests to measure acute insulin responses (AIR) to peripheral i.v. injections of glucose, calcium, and tolbutamide have been reported as potential means to distinguish between these histological forms. In patients with defects in ATP-sensitive potassium channels, tolbutamide will fail to induce insulin release in affected portions of the pancreas, whereas calcium gluconate will enhance insulin release through spontaneously active voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels. Consequently, in focal CHI patients, calcium should promote AIRs from the lesion, whereas tolbutamide should act to promote insulin secretion from the healthy region of the pancreas (outside the focal hyperplasia). We therefore studied AIRs to calcium and tolbutamide stimulation tests in 16 children with focal (n = 9) or diffuse (n = 7) CHI before pancreatic surgery. We found hypervariable AIRs to glucose and calcium stimulation in both focal and diffuse CHI patients. AIRs to tolbutamide stimulation were found modest in focal CHI patients, which might account for beta-cell quiescence in the healthy portion of the pancreas of these patients. We conclude that AIRs to calcium and tolbutamide stimulation tests are not sufficient to differentiate the focal from the diffuse CHI patients.
A middle-aged diabetic woman after four weeks of chlorpropamide treatment developed cholestatic hepatitis with systemic manifestations of idiosyncratic reaction. After recovery, unintended rechallenge with the same drug induced a brisk exacerbation of the symptoms and signs that reversed completely following chlorpropamide withdrawal. Tolbutamide medication was subsequently well tolerated for several weeks, followed by another flare of cholestatic liver lesion and cutaneous eruption with eosinophilia (after each reaction the patient was treated with insulin). Eventually glibenclamide (glyburide) was instituted resulting in very satisfactory control of diabetes, with no untoward reaction.
Rapid expansion of supercritical solutions (RESS) was applied to tolbutamide and barbital. The solubility in supercritical CO2 was determined to estimate the extraction efficiency roughly by a simple method and accurately by a direct spectrophotometric technique. The latter revealed that the solubility of tolbutamide was a function of applied pressure and temperature and was proportional to the pressure. No significant difference in solubility between polymorphic Forms I and II of tolbutamide was detected. Tolbutamide and barbital particles produced by the RESS were characterized by size distribution measurement, polymorph identification and morphological evaluation. Significant size reduction to micron or sub-micron level with narrow size distribution was achieved, while conventional mechanical grinding had only slight effect. The particle size was greatly affected by both extraction and expansion conditions. The lower the extraction temperature was, the smaller was the mean particle size. Higher extraction pressure resulted in smaller mean particle size when compared at the same extraction temperature. The mean particle size was reduced by lowering the spray nozzle temperature, by lowering the expansion chamber temperature, by increasing the CO2 amount per spray, and by increasing the exhaust gas flow rate. The RESS processing realized the polymorphic conversion as well. As for tolbutamide, three polymorphs (Forms I, II, and IV) out of four could be produced by changing the extraction conditions, and in the case of barbital, one polymorph (Form II) out of three was produced consistently.
AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The aim of this study was to estimate the heritability of quantitative measures of glucose regulation obtained from a tolbutamide-modified frequently sampled IVGTT (t-FSIGT) and to correlate the heritability of the glucose-stimulated beta cell response to the tolbutamide-induced beta cell response. In addition, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) having an exclusive effect on either glucose- or tolbutamide-stimulated insulin release were identified. METHODS: Two hundred and eighty-four non-diabetic family members of patients with type 2 diabetes underwent a t-FSIGT with intravenous injection of glucose at t = 0 min and tolbutamide at t = 20 min. Measurements of plasma glucose, serum insulin and serum C-peptide were taken at 33 time points from fasting to 180 min. Insulin secretion rate, acute insulin response (AIR), disposition index (DI) after glucose and disposition index after tolbutamide (DIT), insulin sensitivity (SI), glucose effectiveness (SG) and beta cell responsiveness to glucose were calculated. A polygenic variance component model was used to estimate heritability, genetic correlations and associations. RESULTS: We found high heritabilities for acute insulin secretion subsequent to glucose stimulation (AIRglucose h (2) +/- SE: 0.88 +/- 0.14), but these were slightly lower after tolbutamide (AIRtolbutamide h (2) +/- SE: 0.69 +/- 0.14). We also estimated the heritabilities for SI (h (2) +/- SE: 0.26 +/- 0.12), SG (h (2) +/- SE: 0.47 +/- 0.13), DI (h (2) +/- SE: 0.56 +/- 0.14), DIT (h (2) +/- SE: 0.49 +/- 0.14) and beta cell responsiveness to glucose (h (2) +/- SE: 0.66 +/- 0.12). Additionally, strong genetic correlations were found between measures of beta cell response after glucose and tolbutamide stimulation, with correlation coefficients ranging from 0.77 to 0.88. Furthermore, we identified five SNPs with an exclusive effect on either glucose-stimulated (rs5215, rs1111875, rs11920090) or tolbutamide-stimulated (rs10946398, rs864745) insulin secretion. CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our data demonstrate that both glucose- and tolbutamide-induced insulin secretions are highly heritable traits, which are largely under the control of the same genes.
Tolbutamide is known to be metabolized by cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9), and the effects of the CYP2C9 amino acid polymorphisms *2 (Arg144Cys) and *3 (Ile359Leu) could be important for drug treatment with tolbutamide and for use of tolbutamide as a CYP2C9 test drug. Tolbutamide pharmacokinetics and plasma insulin and glucose concentrations were studied in 23 healthy volunteers with all six combinations of the CYP2C9 alleles *1, *2 and *3, including two subjects with the combined CYP2C9*1/*1 and CYP2C19*2/*2 genotype. Volunteers received a single oral dose of 500 mg tolbutamide, followed by 75 g oral glucose at 1, 4.5 and 8 h after tolbutamide administration. Pharmacokinetic analysis was performed using a computer program for regression analysis of nonlinear mixed effects models. The mean oral clearances of tolbutamide were 0.97 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.89-1.05), 0.86 (95% CI 0.79-0.93), 0.75 (95% CI 0.69-0.81), 0.56 (95% CI 0.51-0.61), 0.45 (95% CI 0.41-0.49) and 0.15 (95% CI 0.14-0.16) l/h in carriers of CYP2C9 genotypes 1/*1, *1/*2, *2/*2, *1/*3, *2/*3 and *3/*3, respectively. Tolbutamide pharmacokinetics in carriers of the functionally deficient CYP2C19*2/*2 genotype were not different from those in the CYP2C19 highly active genotype. Elimination in the six CYP2C9 genotype groups could be expressed as the linear combination of three constants (0.05, 0.04, 0.01 h(-1), which were specific to the respective CYP2C9 alleles *1, *2 and *3, thus indicating a co-dominant mode of inheritance. Insulin and glucose concentration-time curves did not change with differing CYP2C9 genotypes. Tolbutamide was confirmed as a substrate of the genetically polymorphic enzyme CYP2C9. The pronounced differences in pharmacokinetics due to the amino acid variants did not significantly affect plasma insulin and glucose concentrations in healthy volunteers.
Cryopreserved human hepatocytes and other in vitro systems often underpredict in vivo intrinsic clearance (CL(int)). The aim of this study was to explore the potential utility of HepG2 cells transduced with adenovirus vectors expressing a single cytochrome P450 enzyme (Ad-CYP1A2, Ad-CYP2C9, or Ad-CYP3A4) for metabolic clearance predictions. The kinetics of metabolite formation from phenacetin, tolbutamide, and alprazolam and midazolam, selected as substrates probes for CYP1A2, CYP2C9, and CYP3A4, respectively, were characterized in this in vitro system. The magnitude of the K(m) or S(50) values observed in Ad-P450 cells was similar to those found in the literature for other human liver-derived systems. For each substrate, CL(int) (or CL(max)), values from Ad-P450 systems were scaled to human hepatocytes in primary culture using the relative activity factor (RAF) approach. Scaled Ad-P450 CL(int) values were approximately 3- to 6-fold higher (for phenacetin O-deethylation, tolbutamide 4-hydroxylation, and alprazolam 4-hydroxyaltion) or lower (midazolam 1'-hydroxylation) than those reported for human cryopreserved hepatocytes in suspension. Comparison with the in vivo data reveals that Ad-P450 cells provide a favorable prediction of CL(int) for the substrates studied (in a range of 20-200% in vivo observed CL(int)). This is an improvement compared with the consistent underpredictions (<10-50% in in vivo observed CL(int)) found in cryopreserved hepatocyte studies with the same substrates. These results suggest that the Ad-P450 cell is a promising in vitro system for clearance predictions of P450-metabolized drugs.
This study was undertaken to clarify the influence of repeated oral administration of Ginkgo biloba extract (GBE) on CYP2C9 and CYP3A4. CYP2C9 probe (tolbutamide, 125 mg) and CYP3A4 probe (midazolam, 8 mg) were orally administered to 10 male healthy volunteers before and after GBE intake (360 mg/d) for 28 days, and they received 75 g glucose after the dosing of tolbutamide. Plasma drug concentrations and blood glucose levels were measured. The area under concentration versus time curve (AUC0-infinity) for tolbutamide after GBE intake was slightly but significantly (16%) lower than that before GBE intake. Concomitantly, GBE tended to attenuate AUC0-2 of blood glucose-lowering effect of tolbutamide. AUC0-infinity for midazolam was significantly (25%) increased by GBE intake and oral clearance was significantly (26%) decreased. Thus, it is suggested that the combination of GBE and drugs should be cautious in terms of the potential interactions, especially in elderly patients or patients treated with drugs exerting relatively narrow therapeutic windows.
Lesinurad is a selective uric acid reabsorption inhibitor approved for the treatment of hyperuricemia associated with gout in combination with xanthine oxidase inhibitors. In vitro assays indicate that lesinurad is an inducer of CYPs in the order CYP3A > CYP2C8 > CYP2C9 > CYP2C19 > CYP2B6 and an inhibitor of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9. To investigate the drug interaction potential of lesinurad, clinical drug interaction studies were conducted. Open-label studies in volunteers investigated the effects of single-/multiple-dose lesinurad on the pharmacokinetics of sildenafil and amlodipine (CYP3A4 induction), tolbutamide (CYP2C9 inhibition/induction), and repaglinide (CYP2C8 inhibition/induction). There was no apparent induction of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 following repeated lesinurad administration, although no inhibition of CYP2C9 and modest inhibition of CYP2C8 were observed following single-dose lesinurad. Consistent with in vitro observations, lesinurad (200 mg once daily) was an inducer of CYP3A based on the effects on sildenafil exposure. Sildenafil exposure decreased by approximately 34% for C(max) and AUC when administered with multiple-dose lesinurad 200 mg and allopurinol 300 mg, relative to sildenafil alone. During lesinurad therapy, the possibility of reduced efficacy of concomitant drugs that are CYP3A substrates should be considered and their efficacy monitored because of induction of CYP3A by lesinurad.
