RATIONALE: The prefrontal cortex (PFC) and basal ganglia (BG) have been associated with cognitive stability and cognitive flexibility, respectively. We hypothesized that increasing PFC dopamine tone by administering tolcapone (a catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor) to human subjects should promote stability; conversely, increasing BG dopamine tone by administering bromocriptine (a D2 receptor agonist) should promote flexibility. OBJECTIVE: We assessed these hypotheses by administering tolcapone, bromocriptine, and a placebo to healthy subjects who performed a saccadic eye movement task requiring stability and flexibility. METHODS: We used a randomized, double-blind, within-subject design that was counterbalanced across drug administration sessions. In each session, subjects were cued to prepare for a pro-saccade (look towards a visual stimulus) or anti-saccade (look away) on every trial. On 60% of the trials, subjects were instructed to switch the response already in preparation. We hypothesized that flexibility would be required on switch trials, whereas stability would be required on non-switch trials. The primary measure of performance was efficiency (the percentage correct divided by reaction time for each trial type). RESULTS: Subjects were significantly less efficient across all trial types under tolcapone, and there were no significant effects of bromocriptine. After grouping subjects based on Val158Met COMT polymorphism, we found that Met/Met and Val/Met subjects (greater PFC dopamine) were less efficient compared to Val/Val subjects. CONCLUSIONS: Optimal behavior was based on obeying the environmental stimuli, and we found reduced efficiency with greater PFC dopamine tone. We suggest that greater PFC dopamine interfered with the ability to flexibly follow the environment.
OBJECTIVES: Vancomycin is a first-line antibiotic for the treatment of invasive infections in humans caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Based on the premise that antibiotic combinations can exhibit synergistic and antagonistic interactions, medications used for the treatment of infection and other medical conditions were evaluated for their ability to alter MRSA susceptibility to vancomycin. METHODS: A chemical library comprised of 1237 pharmacological agents was evaluated in a 96-well plate format for its ability to inhibit MRSA growth in combination with half the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of vancomycin. Caspofungin and tolcapone were further assessed for synergistic potential by isobologram (checkerboard) and flow cytometric analysis. In addition, the antibacterial activity spectrum and effects of growth conditions of the two drugs were delineated by MIC determination. RESULTS: The study identified 17 nonantibiotic library members with synergistic or additive potential, including caspofungin and tolcapone. Further analyses revealed that the respective medications for invasive candidiasis and Parkinson disease were bactericidal and bacteriostatic inhibitors of S. aureus growth. Flow cytometric analysis of viability further demonstrated that caspofungin in combination with vancomycin increased MRSA cell death in an additive manner, whereas tolcapone appeared to suppress the bactericidal action of vancomycin. CONCLUSION: Overall, this proof of concept study concluded that nonantibiotic drugs can alter the pharmacodynamic properties of vancomycin, with potential clinical implications in patients with a MRSA infection receiving medications for other medical conditions.
Tolcapone is a catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor used for control of motor fluctuations in Parkinson's disease (PD). Since its entry onto the market in 1998, tolcapone has been associated with numerous cases of hepatotoxicity, including three cases of fatal fulminant hepatic failure. The cause of this toxicity is not known; however, it does not occur with the use of the structurally similar drug entacapone. It is known that tolcapone is metabolized to amine (M1) and acetylamine (M2) metabolites in humans, but that the analogous metabolites were not detected in a limited human study of entacapone metabolism. We hypothesized that one or both of these tolcapone metabolites could be oxidized to reactive species and that these reactive metabolites might play a role in tolcapone-induced hepatocellular injury. To investigate this possibility, we examined the ability of M1 and M2 to undergo in vitro bioactivation by electrochemical and enzymatic methods. Electrochemical experiments revealed that M1 and M2 are more easily oxidized than the parent compound, in the order M1 > M2 > tolcapone. There was a general correlation between oxidation potential and the half-lives of the compounds in the presence of two oxidizing systems, horseradish peroxidase and myeloperoxidase. These enzymes catalyzed the oxidation of M1 and M2 to reactive species that could be trapped with glutathione (GSH) to form metabolite adducts (C1 and C2). Each metabolite was found to only form one GSH conjugate, and the structures were tentatively identified using LC-MS/MS. Following incubation of M1 and M2 with human liver microsomes in the presence of GSH, the same adducts were observed, and their structures were confirmed using LC-MS/MS and (1)H NMR. Experiments with chemical P450 inhibitors and cDNA-expressed P450 enzymes revealed that this oxidation is catalyzed by several P450s, and that P450 2E1 and 1A2 play the primary role in the formation of C1 while P450 1A2 is most important for the production of C2. Taken together, these data provide evidence that tolcapone-induced hepatotoxicity may be mediated through the oxidation of the known urinary metabolites M1 and M2 to reactive intermediates. These reactive species may form covalent adducts to hepatic proteins, resulting in damage to liver tissues, although this supposition was not investigated in this study.
Tolcapone, a central and peripheral catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor, reduces the conversion of L-Dopa into 3-O-methyl-Dopa (3-OMD), thus leading to more stable and sustained L-Dopa plasma levels. This study was designed to evaluate the effects of acute and 6-week tolcapone administration on L-Dopa pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients with predictable motor fluctuations. Tapping test, walking time, and tremor, as well as L-Dopa and 3-OMD plasma levels, were assessed before and for 5 hours after the administration of a single L-Dopa dose, alone or in combination with 200 mg tolcapone, in seven patients with PD. This clinical and pharmacokinetic study was repeated after 6 weeks of tolcapone therapy (200 mg three times daily). It was observed that tolcapone, after both acute and chronic administration, prolonged the motor improvement induced by L-Dopa. As a result, at week 6 of tolcapone therapy, the daily hours spent "off" were significantly decreased. Tolcapone significantly increased the area under the curve of L-Dopa plasma levels by slowing down the elimination of L-Dopa from plasma, whereas the maximal concentration of L-Dopa was not modified. 3-OMD levels decreased significantly after acute tolcapone administration, and after 6 weeks of tolcapone therapy, they were approximately one sixth of pre-tolcapone values. The data confirm that tolcapone decreases L-Dopa clearance and prolongs motor response in PD patients with motor fluctuations, and that this effect is maintained after 6 weeks of tolcapone therapy.
In this double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, we investigated the effect of the catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitor tolcapone 100 or 200 mg three times daily on activities of daily living and motor function in 298 patients with parkinsonism receiving levodopa but without motor fluctuations. At 6 months, both dosages of tolcapone produced significant reductions in the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale scores for activities of daily living (Subscale II) and motor function (Subscale III) and in the total score for Subscales I to III. These improvements were maintained up to the 12-month assessment. At 6 months, both tolcapone groups had changes in levodopa dosage that were significantly different from placebo: the tolcapone groups had decreases in mean total daily dose of levodopa, whereas the placebo group had a mean increase. Tolcapone was well tolerated. The principal adverse events were levodopa-related, but these were generally mild or moderate. Diarrhea was the most frequent nondopaminergic adverse event. Tolcapone appears to be beneficial in the treatment of patients with parkinsonism who have not yet developed motor fluctuations.
Research on the impact of disease and treatment on health status and quality of life in patients with movement disorders is limited. We studied quality of life in 46 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) to determine whether the impact of illness and psychosocial adjustment to illness were improved by 42 days of adjunctive therapy with tolcapone (50 mg, 200 mg, or 400 mg three times a day). This study was conducted in parallel with a double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-response study of the safety and efficacy of tolcapone in combination with levodopa/carbidopa therapy. Only a subset of individuals from the larger study participated. In the quality of life study, illness impact and adjustment to illness were measured subjectively by the Sickness Impact Profile (SIP) and the Psychosocial Adjustment to Illness Scale-Self-Report (PAIS-SR). Patient ratings of total illness impact (p = 0.003), physical illness impact (p = 0.05), and psychosocial illness impact (p = 0.007) improved significantly in individuals receiving tolcapone compared with those receiving placebo. There was no statistically significant difference in adjustment to illness when the tolcapone and placebo groups were compared; however, 17 of 21 adjustment to illness indicators showed improvement.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate fully the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of tolcapone, a novel inhibitor of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), after oral and intravenous administration. METHODS: Sixteen healthy male volunteers were given tolcapone in single doses of 200 mg orally and 50 mg intravenously, separated by a washout period of 7 days or more, in a single-center, open-label, randomized, cross-over study. Pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated using both compartmental and non-compartmental methods; pharmacodynamics were evaluated from erythrocyte COMT activity. RESULTS: After an initial lag time of 0.5 h, tolcapone was rapidly absorbed (peak plasma concentrations were reached within approximately 2 h) following either zero- or first-order absorption kinetics. The absolute bioavailability of an oral dose was approximately 60%. The volume of distribution was approximately 9 1, and the total clearance was approximately 71.h-l, resulting in a mean plasma half-life of 1.8 h. The degree of erythrocyte COMT inhibition was closely related to tolcapone plasma concentration; a rebound in COMT activity was observed after tolcapone withdrawal. Both oral and intravenous tolcapone were well tolerated. DISCUSSION: Because of its relatively low systemic clearance, tolcapone exhibits only a small degree of first-pass metabolism and a relatively good oral bioavailability, which explains the higher plasma concentrations and stronger COMT inhibition observed with tolcapone compared with entacapone, another COMT inhibitor. The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile of tolcapone obtained in this study underlines the potential of the agent to be used as an adjunct to levodopa in the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
This investigation aimed to assess whether inhibition of cathecol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) by tolcapone could provide neuroprotection against HIV-associated neurodegenerative effects. This study was conducted based on a previous work, which showed that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at position 158 (val158met) in COMT, resulted in 40 % lower COMT activity. Importantly, this reduction confers a protective effect against HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND), which have been linked to HIV-associated brain changes. SH-SY5Y-differentiated neurons were exposed to macrophage-propagated HIV (neurotropic MACS2-Br strain) in the presence or absence of tolcapone for 6 days. RNA was extracted, and qPCR was performed using Qiagen RT2 custom array consisting of genes for neuronal and synaptic integrity, COMT and pro-inflammatory markers. Immunofluorescence was conducted to validate the gene expression changes at the protein level. Our findings demonstrated that HIV significantly increased the messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of COMT while reducing the expression of microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) (p = 0.0015) and synaptophysin (SYP) (p = 0.012) compared to control. A concomitant exposure of tolcapone ameliorated the perturbed expression of MAP2 (p = 0.009) and COMT (p = 0.024) associated with HIV. Immunofluorescence revealed a trend reduction of SYP and MAP2 with exposure to HIV and that concomitant exposure of tolcapone increased SYP (p = 0.016) compared to HIV alone. Our findings demonstrated in vitro that inhibition of COMT can ameliorate HIV-associated neurodegenerative changes that resulted in the decreased expression of the structural and synaptic components MAP2 and SYP. As HIV-associated dendritic and synaptic damage are contributors to HAND, inhibition of COMT may represent a potential strategy for attenuating or preventing some of the symptoms of HAND.
Tolcapone and entacapone are catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors used as adjuncts to levodopa in the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). The use of tolcapone has been limited by its hepatotoxicity, the cause of which remains uncertain. Tolcapone compound is an uncoupler of mitochondrial respiration in isolated mitochondria and this action may be relevant to its effect on liver function. We have examined the actions of COMT inhibitors on cultured cells, comparing them with those of the classical uncoupler carbonyl cyanide p-(trifluoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone (FCCP), in order to provide insight into their mechanism of potential toxicity. Tolcapone and FCCP were shown to be toxic to human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells and caused a profound reduction in ATP synthesis. Entacapone was not toxic to SH-SY5Y. Tolcapone and FCCP were shown to be equally toxic to cells depleted of mtDNA and thus devoid of a functional respiratory chain. This study demonstrates that tolcapone markedly inhibits ATP synthesis in cultured cells mirroring the effects of a classical uncoupler. However its toxicity may also involve a mechanism independent of its effects upon oxidative phosphorylation.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the tolerability, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of single oral doses of the novel catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor tolcapone in healthy volunteers. METHODS: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, ascending-single-dose study, doses of 5 to 800 mg tolcapone were administered orally to eight sequential groups of six young healthy male volunteers. Adverse events, vital signs, and clinical laboratory variables were recorded. Pharmacokinetic parameters of tolcapone and its 3-O-methylmetabolite were determined. Pharmacodynamics were assessed by determination of COMT activity in erythrocytes. RESULTS: Tolcapone was well tolerated at all dose levels and did not exert a detectable influence on vital sign measurements. The drug was rapidly absorbed and showed dose-proportional pharmacokinetics. Its mean elimination half-life was 2.0 +/- 0.8 hours (n = 42). Plasma levels of the 3-O-methylmetabolite of tolcapone were not proportional to dose, and its formation was delayed at higher doses. Its elimination half-life was 32 +/- 7 hours (n = 29). Tolcapone caused a rapid and reversible inhibition of COMT activity in erythrocytes. At doses of 200 mg and higher, COMT activity was inhibited by more than 80%. The pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationship could be described by an inhibitory Emax model and suggested that metabolites of tolcapone did not substantially contribute to its inhibitory activity. CONCLUSIONS: The novel COMT inhibitor tolcapone was well tolerated at oral doses of 5 to 800 mg. Tolcapone concentration-dependently inhibited COMT activity in erythrocytes and exhibited dose-proportional kinetics. Further investigations into its applicability in the treatment of Parkinson's disease are warranted.
