Torasemide is a lipophilic anilinopyridine sulphonylurea derivative that acts as a high ceiling loop diuretic and has been used for the treatment of both acute and chronic congestive heart failure (CHF) and hypertension. Torasemide is similar to other loop diuretics in terms of its mechanism of diuretic action; namely, blockade of Na+/K+/2Cl- cotransport in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. It has high bioavailability (> 80%), as does bumetanide, but a longer elimination half-life (3 to 4 hours) than either bumetanide or furosemide (frusemide). In the treatment of chronic CHF, oral torasemide (5 to 20 mg/day) has been shown to be an effective diuretic. Patients treated with torasemide for up to 1 year have reduced bodyweight, improved pulmonary haemodynamics, and decreased CHF severity. Intravenous torasemide (20 to 60mg as a single dose) has been shown to be as effective as furosemide in the treatment of acute CHF, and resulted in significant diuresis, bodyweight loss, and improved pulmonary haemodynamics and exercise performance. 'Non-diuretic' dosages (2.5 to 5 mg/day) of oral torasemide have been used to treat essential hypertension, both as monotherapy and in combination with other antihypertensive agents. When used in these dosages, torasemide lowered diastolic blood pressure (DBP) to below 90mm Hg in 8 to 12 weeks in 70 to 80% of patients. With dose doubling, this level of efficacy occurred in more than 90% of hypertensive patients. Clinical trials have established that blood pressure can be maintained at this level for at least 1 year with low dose torasemide. Torasemide is well tolerated in dosages up to 20 mg/day for at least 1 year. The most commonly reported adverse effects are those associated with loop diuretics in general. These include transient hypokalaemia, hyperuricaemia, dizziness, headache, gastrointestinal disturbances, orthostatic hypotension and fatigue. Adverse effects are comparable with those of other diuretics and rarely necessitate drug withdrawal.
The aim of this study was to analyze the incidence and types of arrhythmia and their relationship with the severity and prognosis of chronic heart failure (CHF) in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), and to investigate the therapeutic effect of torasemide versus furosemide on CHF and incidence of arrhythmia. DCM patients with NYHA cardiac function II-IV were continuously monitored using a 24-h dynamic electrocardiogram (Holter), and arrhythmia incidence was analyzed by computer automatic analysis combined with manual assessment. In total, 125 participants were evenly divided into two groups: torasemide group which received 10 mg oral torasemide once daily) and regular anti-heart failure treatment (N=65), and furosemide group which received torasemide (20 mg once daily orally) and regular antiheart failure treatment (N=60). Another 60 normal healthy persons served as the normal control group. Incidence and severity of arrhythmia increased when degree of CHF was elevated. Size of left atrium was related to atrial fibrillation and size of left ventricle was related to malignant arrhythmia. At 3 months after treatment, cardiac function in both groups improved and incidence and severity of arrhythmia in both groups were reduced. However, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was higher in the torasemide group than in the furosemide group, while incidence of arrhythmia was lower in the torasemide group. Arrhythmias frequently occurred in patients with DCM and HF. Type of cardiac arrhythmia is closely related to ventricular enlargement and cardiac function grade. Torasemide is better for improving cardiac function to reduce arrhythmia and CHF compared to furosemide.
Torasemide is a new loop diuretic that differs from others in this class in that only 20% of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine with the remaining 80% being eliminated by hepatic metabolism. The large component of nonrenal clearance would predict that torasemide would have only minimal accumulation and prolongation of half-life in patients with renal insufficiency, and this proves to be the case. In contrast, in patients with liver disease, impairment of hepatic elimination causes accumulation of torasemide in plasma with prolongation of half-life. In addition, in cirrhosis, there is increased elimination of unchanged drug into the urine compared to healthy controls. In patients with renal insufficiency, response to remaining nephrons is normal as has been observed with other loop diuretics. In patients with cirrhosis and in those with congestive heart failure, response is diminished, again as has been observed with other loop diuretics. Interestingly, in patients with cirrhosis, the increased delivery of drug into the urine is sufficient to compensate for the decreased pharmacodynamics of response so that overall response is similar to that which occurs in health subjects.
BACKGROUND: Approximately 50% of heart failure patients are readmitted to hospital within 6 months, owing to deterioration of their condition. Thus, symptomatic treatment of heart failure requires significant improvement. The aim of this study is to compare the effects of torasemide and furosemide on biochemical parameters of haemodynamic and neurohormonal compensation, myocardial remodelling, clinical outcomes and quality of life in patients with chronic heart failure. METHODS: This is a multicentre, randomized, open, blinded endpoint phase-IV trial. The study includes 120 heart failure patients in NYHA (New York Heart Association) functional class II-IV, treated with optimal heart failure therapy, with indications for use of loop diuretics. At enrolment, patients are stable, with a fixed dose of loop diuretics. Patients are randomized to treatment with furosemide or torasemide (randomization 1:1). After randomization, the current fixed dose of furosemide is continued or is replaced by an equipotential dose of torasemide (4:1). The study consists of two control visits (3 and 6 months after enrolment) with minimal follow-up of 6 months. Assessment involves clinical examination, Quality of Life Questionnaire, laboratory tests, echocardiography, electrocardiography, 24 h Holter-electrocardiography monitoring, 6 -min walk test and assessment of fluid retention. Any need for dose adjustment is assessed during the observation. The primary objective is to compare the effects of torasemide and furosemide on clinical and biochemical parameters of haemodynamic and neurohormonal compensation and myocardial remodelling. Secondary objectives include monitoring of: changes in signs and symptoms of heart failure, NYHA functional class, quality of life, dosage changes, rate of readmissions and mortality. DISCUSSION: Despite decades of the diuretic's history, knowledge about diuretic therapy is still unsatisfactory. The most widely used diuretic, furosemide, has a stormy pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, and is associated with a high risk of mortality and hospitalization for worsening heart failure. Reports are very encouraging and suggest beneficial effects of torasemide. Hence, there is a need for further studies of the overall effect of torasemide, compared with furosemide. This can translate into improved quality of life and better prognosis of patients with heart failure. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01942109 . Registered on 24 August 2013.
BACKGROUND/AIM: To evaluate the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of furosemide and torasemide in patients with cirrhosis and diuretic resistant ascites. METHODS: Eighteen patients were randomly allocated to receive intravenous torasemide (40 mg) or furosemide (80 mg). The renal response to these drugs was assessed in baseline conditions and in the 24 h following drug administration together with plasma and urinary concentrations of furosemide, torasemide and its metabolites. RESULTS: Torasemide induced significantly greater diuretic and natriuretic effects than furosemide in the first hour after drug administration. No other significant differences between the two drugs were observed with respect to the renal response to these drugs. Torasemide reached a lower maximum plasma concentration than furosemide, but the former drug had a longer apparent terminal half-life and lower renal and non-renal clearances. Comparing these results with those previously reported in healthy subjects, both drugs showed a reduced elimination rate through renal and non-renal routes, and a larger distribution to body fluids. As a consequence, the half-life of both drugs was longer than in healthy subjects. Urinary excretion of pharmacologically active species, however, was quantitatively unchanged after torasemide administration, whereas it was reduced after furosemide. Finally, the natriuretic potency of both drugs was markedly reduced in these patients. CONCLUSIONS: The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of torasemide and furosemide are markedly altered in patients with diuretic resistant ascites.
The pharmacodynamic effects and the pharmacokinetic parameters of torasemide (1-isopropyl-3- ([4-(3-methyl-phenylamino)pyridine]-3-sulfonyl)urea) 20 mg and furosemide 40 mg were compared after oral and intravenous administration in 6 healthy volunteers. The plasma elimination half-life for i.v. and oral torasemide was 2.2 h and 2.8 h, its bioavailability after oral administration was 91%, about 25% of the total body clearance was due to renal excretion both after iv. or oral application. For furosemide, a plasma elimination half-life of 0.6 h for i.v. and 0.8 h for oral application was found. The bioavailability was 40%, and about 62% of the drug was excreted via the kidney. Both drugs produced a similar diuretic and natriuretic effect. However, torasemide showed an increased duration of action compared to furosemide and a higher relation between urinary Na and K excretion, both after i.v. and oral administration, suggesting less loss of potassium after To. Both agents were well tolerated.
The aim of this work was to investigate the use of torasemide as a highly sensitive indicator substance and to develop a formulation thereof for establishing quantitative relationships between hot-melt extrusion process conditions and critical quality attributes (CQAs). Using solid-state characterization techniques and a 10 mm lab-scale co-rotating twin-screw extruder, we studied torasemide in a Soluplus(R) (SOL)-polyethylene glycol 1500 (PEG 1500) matrix, and developed and characterized a formulation which was used as a process indicator to study thermal- and hydrolysis-induced degradation, as well as residual crystallinity. We found that torasemide first dissolved into the matrix and then degraded. Based on this mechanism, extrudates with measurable levels of degradation and residual crystallinity were produced, depending strongly on the main barrel and die temperature and residence time applied. In addition, we found that 10% w/w PEG 1500 as plasticizer resulted in the widest operating space with the widest range of measurable residual crystallinity and degradant levels. Torasemide as an indicator substance behaves like a challenging-to-process API, only with higher sensitivity and more pronounced effects, e.g., degradation and residual crystallinity. Application of a model formulation containing torasemide will enhance the understanding of the dynamic environment inside an extruder and elucidate the cumulative thermal and hydrolysis effects of the extrusion process. The use of such a formulation will also facilitate rational process development and scaling by establishing clear links between process conditions and CQAs.
The Nitrosogenesis of skin cancer is a modern newly introduced concept in medicine, mainly concerning melanoma, but also keratinocytic cancers such as basal cell carcinoma. The nitroso-contamination of more than 300 drugs worldwide and the permanent (relatively short-term) intake of mutagen-contaminated drugs could create serious prerequisites for the development of skin cancer. Retrospective but also prospective analyses following potentially contaminated polymedication with a heterogeneous type of nitrosamines in real patients are indicative of a causal connection rather than a sporadic association between 1) intake of a possibly nitrosamine-contaminated drug and 2) generation of keratinocytic skin cancer. The pathogenesis of high-risk periocular localized basal cell carcinomas was until recently shrouded in mystery as it was mainly and until now associated with 1) intake of phototoxic drugs and 2) intense exposure to UV radiation (without intake of drugs), 3) congenital or acquired immunodeficiencies, and 4) Goltz Gorlin syndrome or 5) Xeroderma pigmentosum. Nitrosamines/ NDSRIs within the framework of polycotaminated drug intake appear to be one reasonable additional explanation for the association between carcinogen intake and subsequent skin cancer development and progression, and a relatively short-term one at that. Recently published scientific data provide information on a new ability of some of the nitrosamines - namely that some of them are photocarcinogenic or genotoxic after activation with UVA radiation. We present 4 patients who developed high-risk periocular localized basal cell carcinomas of the skin after/within the intake of potentially nitrosamine-contaminated drugs. The presented data are confirmatory with respect to previously published scientific observations on the carcinogenic effects of valsartan, candesartan, bisoprolol, metoprolol, perindopril, lisinopril and amlodipine. The contribution of newly validated data concerning potential/actual carcinogenic/genotoxic activity in the article is also due to the following newly announced nitroso preparations: torasemide, moxonidine and mirabegron. The expansion of the  bases of the pyramid  determining the stability of drug related (Photo) Nitrosogenesis/ Carcinogenesis (in terms of skin cancer generation) is growing daily. Exogenously/drug-induced Nitrosogenesis and the subsequently triggered carcinogenesis are a completely new explanatory concepts concerning the pathogenesis of skin tumors that remained unanalyzed and hidden for decades. Until now. The official lack of 1) availability, and of 2) precise concentrations regarding nitrosamines in medicinal preparations, are some of the most unexplained acts of irresponsibility to end-users and remain for the moment without a definitive answer from either regulators and manufacturers respectively. Polycontamination of polymedication in polymorbid patients remains highly problematic, at least as a cofactor in the development and progression of keratinocytic cancers, and this in the short term. Recently published data but also data from the past are suggestive that nitrosamines in tobacco are pivotal in the development of acquired mutations in p53 and RAS oncogenes in humans and rodents. The same genes are also affected by mutations in keratinocytic cancer patients. The overlapping mutation patterns of UV radiation-induced mutations in target genes such as p53 and RAS with those caused by some nitrosamines is indicative of a synergism available in terms of gene toxicity or possibly photocarcinogenicity of the latter. What leads the scientific community to believe that the nitrosamines in drugs, similar in composition and carcinogenic potency, act differently, is unclear. The link between drug intake, nitrosamine contamination, generation of some acquired mutations and subsequent cancer development becomes more than obvious and logically conditioned. The thesis of the controlled spread of cancer sounds more than logical today because: whoever controls and regulates the spread of carcinogens/mutagens/nitrosamines is also able to control the occurrence and spread of skin cancer. The Pharmaco-oncogenesis of skin cancer is determined by exogenously mediated Nitrosogenesis or the permissive availability for certain nitrosamines in drugs worldwide.
PURPOSE: Diuretics are the primary treatment for the management of chronic heart failure (HF) symptoms and for the improvement of acute HF symptoms. The rate of delivery to the site of action has been suggested to affect diuretic pharmacodynamics. The main objective of this clinical trial was to explore whether a prolonged release tablet formulation of torasemide (torasemide-PR) was more natriuretically efficient in patients with chronic HF compared to immediate-release furosemide (furosemide-IR) after a single-dose administration. Moreover, the pharmacokinetics of torasemide-PR, furosemide-IR, and torasemide-IR were assessed in chronic HF patients as well as urine pharmacodynamics. METHODS: Randomized, open-label, blinded-endpoint, crossover, and single-dose Phase I clinical trial with three experimental periods. Torasemide-PR and furosemide-IR were administered as a single dose in a crossover fashion for the first two periods, and torasemide-IR 10 mg was administered for the third period. Blood and urine samples were collected at fixed timepoints. The primary endpoint was the natriuretic efficiency after administration of torasemide-PR and furosemide-IR, defined as the ratio between the average drug-induced natriuresis and the average drug recovered in urine over 24 hours. RESULTS: Ten patients were included and nine completed the study. Here, we present the results from nine patients. Torasemide-PR was more natriuretically efficient than furosemide-IR (0.096 +/- 0.03 mmol/mug vs 0.015 +/- 0.0007 mmol/mug; P < 0.0001). Mictional urgency was lower and more delayed with torasemide-PR than with furosemide-IR. CONCLUSION: In a study with a limited sample size, our results suggest that 10 mg of torasemide-PR is more natriuretically efficient than 40 mg of furosemide-IR after single-dose administration in patients with chronic HF over a 24-hour collection period. Further studies are necessary to evaluate potential pharmacodynamic differences between torasemide formulations and to assess its impact on clinical therapeutics.
Torasemide is a "loop type" diuretic drug. For pharmacokinetic studies sensitive analytic methods are essential for authentic qualitative and quantitative information. A robust, selective and sensitive HPLC method is described for the simultaneous determination of torasemide, its major metabolite M5 and its active metabolites M1 and M3 and an internal standard within 17 min. Solid-phase extraction with C(2)-cartridges was used for the clean-up of plasma samples. The chromatographic separation was carried out on a CN-column with a mobile phase consisting of perchloric acid (0.02 M, pH 2.5)/acetonitrile (90/10, v/v)). The calibration range used reached from 20 to 1000 ng/ml for all analytes. Coefficients of variation were less than 10% at every calibration point for each analyte. Plasma concentrations in samples obtained from volunteers in the course of a clinical study could be reliably measured with this method. Median maximum concentrations in plasma after a 10mg oral dose during a 24h study interval were located at 1h for torasemide, 1h for M1 and 2h for M5. Concentrations between 2226 and <20 ng/ml for torasemide, between 159 and <20 ng/ml for M1 and between 420 and <20 ng/ml for M5 were observed.
Free radical formation in two diuretics: indapamide and torasemide was examined during UV irradiation and storage at higher temperatures using X-band (9.3 GHz) electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR). The aim of this study was to investigate the possibility of storing indapamide and torasemide under UV irradiation and at higher temperatures, which may occur during exposure to light. The diuretic samples were exposed to UVA irradiation for 15, 30 and 45 minutes, and stored at temperatures of 40 ( degrees )C and 50 ( degrees )C by 30 minutes. The EPR spectra were analyzed to determine the amplitudes (A), linewidths (DeltaB(pp)), and integral intensities (I) and g factors. The concentrations of free radical (N) in the diuretic samples were also determined. The influence of microwave power on amplitudes, linewidths and the asymmetry parameter were evaluated. The result showed that the tested indapamide and torasemide samples exhibited high free radical concentrations in the range of 10(18)-10(19) spin/g after UV irradiation and heat treatment. Therefore, due to the significant free radical formation indapamide and torasemide should not be stored under UV light and at temperatures of 40 ( degrees )C and 50 ( degrees )C. The complex character of free radical systems in the diuretic samples was proved as evidenced by the changes of the asymmetry parameters of the EPR lines with increasing microwave power. Fast spin-lattice relaxation processes were observed in all tested diuretic samples, regardless of the storage conditions. Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy is proposed as a useful method in pharmacy to determine the appropriate storage conditions for diuretics.
The tolerance and diuretic properties of torasemide after oral or intravenous administration to healthy volunteers were studied. Six groups, each of 6 subjects, were given single rising oral doses ranging from 10 to 100 mg; 8 subjects received ascending i.v. doses on alternate days, ranging from 2.5 to 80 mg. At the highest oral doses investigated (80 mg and 100 mg) a number of volunteers complained of cramps in the knees, calves and feet. These symptoms were generally of short duration. Similar effects were not encountered during the intravenous study. There were no significant changes in ECG. Some significant drug-related changes were encountered in the within-study biochemistry and haematology assessments. Torasemide proved to be a potent diuretic following oral administration at all the doses investigated and following intravenous administration at all doses except 2.5 mg. A linear relationship existed between the urine output and the logarithm of the dose, and both sodium and chloride excretion were linearly correlated with urine volume. The rate of potassium excretion was markedly lower than that of sodium and chloride and was linearly correlated with the logarithm of the urine volume. Torasemide was well tolerated from all perspectives studied. It showed a potent diuretic property, and was equally effective by the oral and intravenous routes.
In a prospective randomized short-term study, the efficacy and safety of xipamide and a combination of spironolactone and furosemide were compared in the treatment of hepatic cirrhotic ascites. Twenty-two patients were randomized to either xipamide, 20 mg/day (group I), or spironolactone, 200 mg/day, combined with furosemide, 40 mg on alternate days (group II). During the first 4 days of treatment, adequate diuresis, measured as loss of body weight greater than 1.6 kg, occurred in 7 patients in group I and in 3 in group II. In the latter group, another 4 patients responded satisfactorily after a further 4 days of treatment. Four patients in group I who failed to respond to xipamide with an adequate loss of body weight were subsequently treated with the spironolactone-furosemide combination, but only one responded. Two patients in group II who failed to respond to the combination of spironolactone and furosemide also failed to respond to xipamide. In both groups, a positive diuretic response occurred only when the pretreatment fractional sodium excretion exceeded 0.2%. Diuretic resistance was overcome only by additional treatments which reduced proximal tubular sodium reabsorption. Xipamide commonly induced hypokalaemia; in contrast hyperkalaemia was seen following treatment with the spironolactone-furosemide combination. Renal function remained stable in all patients during both diuretic treatments. An open ongoing 6-month trial of torasemide, 10-40 mg/day, in combination with spironolactone, 50-400 mg/day, has also been undertaken in 117 patients with cirrhotic ascites who showed inadequate responses to salt and water restriction and spironolactone alone. Twenty-seven patients have been withdrawn from the study, 9 for the complications of hepatic coma, bleeding oesophageal varices, or hyponatraemia. Twenty-two patients are still being treated and 68 have completed the trial on a mean dose of torasemide, 15 mg/day. Body weight was reduced by a mean of 2.3 kg at 6 weeks, 2.6 kg at 14 weeks and 3.2 kg after 6 months. Loss of body weight was primarily associated with reduction of ascites and secondarily with reduction of peripheral oedema. There were no untoward adverse reactions with torasemide, and no significant changes in serum electrolytes, liver, renal, or haematological variables.
The pharmacokinetics of 20 mg torasemide i.v. has been studied in 7 healthy controls and 9 patients with varying degrees of renal impairment. Torasemide had a t1/2 of about 4h which was independent of kidney function, as the nonrenal clearance of torasemide was 3-times greater than its renal clearance. The active metabolite M 1 and the main metabolite M 5 were accumulated in chronic renal failure. In contrast to liver function, therefore, kidney failure does not have an important effect on the pharmacokinetics of torasemide.
