Moderate-to-severe pain represents a heavy burden in patients' quality of life, and ultimately in the society and in healthcare costs. The aim of this review was to summarize data on tramadol and tapentadol adverse effects, toxicity, potential advantages and limitations according to the context of clinical use. We compared data on the pharmacological and toxicological profiles of tramadol and tapentadol, after an extensive literature search in the US National Library of Medicine (PubMed). Tramadol is a prodrug that acts through noradrenaline and serotonin reuptake inhibition, with a weak opioid component added by its metabolite O-desmethyltramadol. Tapentadol does not require metabolic activation and acts mainly through noradrenaline reuptake inhibition and has a strong opioid activity. Such features confer tapentadol potential advantages, namely lower serotonergic, dependence and abuse potential, more linear pharmacokinetics, greater gastrointestinal tolerability and applicability in the treatment of chronic and neuropathic pain. Although more studies are needed to provide clear guidance on the opioid of choice, tapentadol shows some advantages, as it does not require CYP450 system activation and has minimal serotonergic effects. In addition, it leads to less side effects and lower abuse liability. However, in vivo and in vitro studies have shown that tramadol and tapentadol cause similar toxicological damage. In this context, it is important to underline that the choice of opioid should be individually balanced and a tailored decision, based on previous experience and on the patient's profile, type of pain and context of treatment. SIGNIFICANCE: This review underlines the need for a careful prescription of tramadol and tapentadol. Although both are widely prescribed synthetic opioid analgesics, their toxic effects and potential dependence are not completely understood yet. In particular, concerning tapentadol, further research is needed to better assess its toxic effects.
Tramadol is commonly prescribed for pain control because it presents a lower risk for addiction and respiratory depression compared to other opioids. However, tramadol's serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitory effects result in a unique adverse effect profile. Two such adverse events are serotonin syndrome and seizures. The prevalence of tramadol-induced serotonin syndrome and seizures is modest in the general population, but if left untreated, the morbidity and mortality can be high; therefore, prompt recognition and management is essential. Various risk factors such as medical comorbidities, use or abuse of supratherapeutic doses of tramadol, and concomitant administration of proconvulsant serotonergic cytochrome P-450 inhibitors will help clinicians identify individuals at an elevated risk for serotonin toxicity and seizures. Serotonin syndrome and seizures can be effectively treated by administering benzodiazepines, providing supportive care, and discontinuing tramadol and other contributing agents. Cyproheptadine should be administered in moderate to severe cases of serotonin syndrome. Our objective is to summarize the literature on the pharmacology, epidemiology, risk factors, clinical presentations, and evidence-based management of tramadol-related seizures and serotonin syndrome.
1. The aim of this study was to compare the in vitro cytotoxic effect of tramadol and M1 metabolite in HepG2 cell line, the underlying mechanism, and PI3K/AKT/mTOR as potential target.2. Concentrations representing therapeutic level for tramadol (2 microM) and M1 metabolite (0.5 microM) were used. In addition, other increasing concentrations representing higher toxic levels were used (6, 10 microM for tramadol and 1.5, 2.5 microM for M1 metabolites). Cytotoxicity was assessed at 24, 48 and 72 h.3. Both tramadol and M1 metabolites were able to produce cytotoxicity in a dose and time dependent manner. Insignificant difference was detected between cells exposed to tramadol and M1 metabolite at therapeutic concentrations. Tramadol-induced apoptotic and autophagic cell death while M1 metabolite-induced apoptosis only. For PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, the therapeutic concentration of tramadol was only able to increase phosphorylation of AKT while higher toxic concentrations were able to increase phosphorylation of whole pathway; Meanwhile, M1 metabolite was able to increase the phosphorylation of the whole pathway significantly in therapeutic and toxic concentrations.4. In conclusion, both tramadol and M1 are equally cytotoxic. Apoptosis and autophagy both mediate hepatic cell death. PI3K/AKT pathway is involved in apoptosis induction while autophagy is regulated through mTOR independent pathway.
In this multicenter double-blind randomized study the analgesic efficacy and safety of 50 mg tramadol was compared against 50 mg pentazocine by mouth in the treatment of 160 patients with acute pain following prolapsed intervertebral disc repair. The day of surgery patients were treated with parenteral opioids. The study started the morning after surgery. A wash out period of four hours was allowed after parenteral analgesics. Pain assessment was made using a visual analogue scale (VAS) and a verbal rating scale (VRS) during a six hours observation period. Remedication with the same drug at the same dosage was allowed if pain relief was unsatisfactory. Overall analgesic activity and spontaneously reported side effects were also registered. Results showed both treatments provided equivalent effective analgesia for the six hours observation period. The global assessment of analgesia by patient and observer was not significantly different for both treatments, although less additional medication was required in the pentazocine group. Side effects were quite common in both groups, and occurred more frequently in the pentazocine group.
OBJECTIVE: To present a systematic review to assess efficacy and safety of tramadol for premature ejaculation. METHODS: A literature search was performed using the Cochrane Library, MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Science Citation Index Expanded. Literature reviewed included meta-analyses and randomized and nonrandomized prospective studies. End points included intravaginal ejaculation latency time (in minutes), adverse events, and patient-reported outcome assessments. We used mean difference to measure intravaginal ejaculation latency time and odds ratio to measure adverse events rates. These odds ratios were pooled using a random or fixed effects model and were tested for heterogeneity. We used the Cochrane Collaboration's Review manager (RevMan) 5.1 software for statistical analysis. RESULTS: We identified 7 publications that strictly met our eligibility criteria. Meta-analysis of extractable data showed that tramadol was associated with a 3-minute intravaginal ejaculation latency time increasing (mean difference 2.77 minutes; 95% CI 1.12-4.47; P = .001) and significantly more patients with adverse events rates compared with placebo (odds ratio 2.89; 95% CI 1.88-4.43; P < .0001). There were no differences between the tramadol and the paroxetine of intravaginal ejaculation latency time (mean difference -0.44; 95% CI -5.07 to 4.18; P = .85). In addition, patients saw significantly greater improvement in patient-reported outcome. CONCLUSION: In this diverse population, tramadol is an effective and safety pharmacologic therapy for premature ejaculation.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: We aimed to study the impact of size, maturation and cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) genotype activity score as predictors of intravenous tramadol disposition. METHODS: Tramadol and O-desmethyl tramadol (M1) observations in 295 human subjects (postmenstrual age 25 weeks to 84.8 years, weight 0.5-186 kg) were pooled. A population pharmacokinetic analysis was performed using a two-compartment model for tramadol and two additional M1 compartments. Covariate analysis included weight, age, sex, disease characteristics (healthy subject or patient) and CYP2D6 genotype activity. A sigmoid maturation model was used to describe age-related changes in tramadol clearance (CLPO), M1 formation clearance (CLPM) and M1 elimination clearance (CLMO). A phenotype-based mixture model was used to identify CLPM polymorphism. RESULTS: Differences in clearances were largely accounted for by maturation and size. The time to reach 50 % of adult clearance (TM50) values was used to describe maturation. CLPM (TM50 39.8 weeks) and CLPO (TM50 39.1 weeks) displayed fast maturation, while CLMO matured slower, similar to glomerular filtration rate (TM50 47 weeks). The phenotype-based mixture model identified a slow and a faster metabolizer group. Slow metabolizers comprised 9.8 % of subjects with 19.4 % of faster metabolizer CLPM. Low CYP2D6 genotype activity was associated with lower (25 %) than faster metabolizer CLPM, but only 32 % of those with low genotype activity were in the slow metabolizer group. CONCLUSIONS: Maturation and size are key predictors of variability. A two-group polymorphism was identified based on phenotypic M1 formation clearance. Maturation of tramadol elimination occurs early (50 % of adult value at term gestation).
BACKGROUND: Tramadol, a 4-phenyl-piperidine analog of codeine, has a unique action in that it has a central opioidergic, noradrenergic, serotonergic analgesic, and peripheral local anesthetic (LA) effect. Many studies have reported contradictory findings regarding the peripheral analgesic effect of tramadol as an adjuvant to LA in brachial plexus block (BPB). This meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the effects of tramadol as an adjunct to LA in BPB during shoulder or upper extremity surgery. METHODS: We searched the PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane, KoreaMed databases, and Google Scholar for eligible randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that compared BPB with LA alone and BPB with LA and tramadol. Primary outcomes were the effects of tramadol as an adjuvant on duration of sensory block, motor block, and analgesia. Secondary outcomes were the effects of tramadol as an adjuvant on time to onset of sensory block and motor block and on adverse effects. We performed the meta-analysis using Review Manager 5.3 software. RESULTS: We identified 16 RCTs with 751 patients. BPB with tramadol prolonged the duration of sensory block (mean difference [MD], -61.5 min; 95% CI, -95.5 to -27.6; P = 0.0004), motor block (MD, -65.6 min; 95% CI, -101.5 to -29.7; P = 0.0003), and analgesia (MD, -125.5 min; 95% CI, -175.8 to -75.3; P < 0.0001) compared with BPB without tramadol. Tramadol also shortened the time to onset of sensory block (MD, 2.1 min; 95% CI, 1.1 to 3.1; P < 0.0001) and motor block (MD, 1.2 min; 95% CI, 0.2 to 2.1; P = 0.010). In subgroup analysis, the duration of sensory block, motor block, and analgesia was prolonged for BPB with tramadol 100 mg (P < 0.05) but not for BPB with tramadol 50 mg. The quality of evidence was high for duration of analgesia according to the GRADE system. Adverse effects were comparable between the studies. CONCLUSIONS: In upper extremity surgery performed under BPB, use of tramadol 100 mg as an adjuvant to LA appears to prolong the duration of sensory block, motor block, and analgesia, and shorten the time to onset of sensory and motor blocks without altering adverse effects.
Venlafaxine and tramadol are relatively new compounds indicated for the treatment of depression and pain, respectively. These agents share a number of molecular and pharmacological features that may allow for broader and overlapping therapeutic indications for both drugs. Additionally, certain patient populations with coexisting depression and pain syndromes could potentially be treated with a single agent.
Multimodal analgesia is employed in paediatric pain management to maximise analgesia and minimise side effects. Tramadol is dosed at 1-1.5 mg/kg to treat severe pain in children but the assay for tramadol in plasma samples for pharmacokinetic and toxicology studies does not often consider concurrently administered medications. In this study we developed and validated an HPLC-UV method to quantify tramadol and its main metabolite (O-desmethyltramadol) in human plasma in the presence of seven potentially interfering drugs. Sample preparation method was developed by combining liquid-liquid extraction and protein precipitation. Chromatographic separation was achieved on a BDS-Hypersil-C18 column (5 microm, 250 x 4.6 mm) using a double gradient method. The limit of quantification was 6.7 ng/ml for both tramadol and ODT. The precision and accuracy were in compliance with ICH guidelines. This method was successfully employed to analyse the blood samples of 137 paediatric participants in a tramadol pharmacokinetic trial.
AIMS: To search for pharmaceutical additives in illicit alcoholic beverages referred to the laboratory of Legal Medicine Organization in Iran in 2017. METHODS: Hundred beverages were sampled. Ethanol content was determined by gas chromatography with flame ionization detection (GC-FID) and then a liquid-liquid extraction combined with reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography equipped with a photodiode array detector (PAD) was employed for the qualitative analysis. The analysis was confirmed using gas chromatography coupled with mass spectroscopy (GC/MS). RESULTS: In 15% either one or more of the following were detected: tramadol, methadone, diazepam, oxazepam, flurazepam and alprazolam. Tramadol was found with highest frequency. CONCLUSIONS: The wide availability of addictive pharmaceutical is leading to fortification of alcoholic beverages on some countries. The addition of such depressant additives should be better known because of the potentially fatal consequences of the combination with ethanol, as well as the potential for adverse effects on behavior.
