Sedative antidepressants are commonly used drugs in the treatment of insomnia. However, some recommendations claim that only hypnotics have been proven effective in the treatment of sleep initiation and maintenance disorders. The aim of this article is to compare the effect of hypnotics and trazodone on sleep, and to analyse the evidence for the use of trazodone in the treatment of insomnia. Three studies investigated the effects of trazodone on sleep in primary insomnia, 5 studies on insomnia in the course of affective disorders and 6 studies on insomnia in other indications (PTSD, Alzheimer's disease, alcohol and opiate dependence, somatoform disorder, and insomnia during pregnancy). In the treatment of insomnia, trazodone is less effective than hypnotics in the treatment of sleep onset insomnia (i.e., disorders of falling asleep). For this indication it needs to be administered earlier than hypnotics, at least 1 hour before bedtime. It is, however, very effective in the treatment of sleep-maintenance insomnia, especially in patients with comorbid mental disorders or patients treated with activating antidepressants. Hypnotics and trazodone have the opposite effect on deep sleep. Trazodone increases the duration of deep sleep, which is associated with better sleep quality as assessed by patients. In contrast, hypnotics decrease slow-wave activityin sleep EEG, which is the biomarker of deep sleep. The main mechanism through which trazodone promotes sleep is its antagonistic effect on 5-HT2 serotonin receptors, while hypnotics are agonists of gamma-aminobutyric acid GABAA receptors, and other sedative antidepressants block H1 histamine receptors. This is associated with a low risk of weight gain, which is rare with trazodone treatment.
A fatal case of suicide with trazodone alone in a 40-year-old patient is reported. Life-threatening arrhythmias, such as torsades de pointes and complete AV block, are recorded. Blood collected at admission contained a trazodone toxic concentration of 25.4 micrograms/mL. The patient developed multiple organ failure and died less than 24 hours after his admission to the emergency department. The authors discuss the effects of overdose of trazodone, a well-known safe antidepressant drug.
BACKGROUND: Motor neuron disease represents a group of progressive and incurable diseases that are characterised by selective loss of motor neurons, resulting in an urgent need for rapid identification of effective disease-modifying therapies. The MND SMART trial aims to test the safety and efficacy of promising interventions efficiently and definitively against a single contemporaneous placebo control group. We now report results of the stage two interim analysis for memantine and trazodone. METHODS: MND SMART is an investigator-led, phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multiarm, multistage, randomised, adaptive platform trial recruiting at 20 hospital centres in the UK. Individuals older than 18 years with a confirmed diagnosis of either amyotrophic lateral sclerosis classified by the revised El Escorial criteria, primary lateral sclerosis, progressive muscular atrophy, or progressive bulbar palsy, regardless of disease duration, were eligible for screening. Participants were randomised (1:1:1) to receive oral trazodone 200 mg once a day, oral memantine 20 mg once a day, or matched placebo using a computer-generated minimisation algorithm delivered via a secure web-based system. Co-primary outcome measures were clinical functioning, measured by rate of change in the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale Revised (ALSFRS-R), and survival. Comparisons were conducted in four stages, with predefined criteria for stopping at the end of stages one and two. We report interim analysis from the stage two results, which was done when 100 participants per group (excluding long survivors, defined as >8 years since diagnosis at baseline) completed a minimum of 12 months of follow-up for the candidate investigational medicinal products. The trial is registered on the European Clinical Trials Registry, 2019-000099-41, and ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04302870, and is ongoing. FINDINGS: Between Feb 27, 2020, and July 24, 2023 (database lock for interim analysis two), 554 people with a motor neuron disease were randomly allocated to memantine (183 [33%]), trazodone (185 [33%]), or placebo (186 [34%]). The primary interim analysis population comprised 530 participants, of whom 175 (33%) had been allocated memantine, 175 (33%) had been allocated trazodone, and 180 (34%) had been allocated placebo. Over 12 months of follow-up, the mean rate of change per month in ALSFRS-R was -0.650 for memantine, -0.625 for trazodone, and -0.655 for placebo (memantine versus placebo estimated mean difference 0.033, one-sided 90% CI lower level -0.085; one-sided p=0.36; trazodone vs placebo: 0.065, -0.051; one-sided p=0.24). The one-sided p values were both above the significance threshold of 10%, indicating that neither memantine nor trazodone groups met the criteria for continuation. There were 483 participants with at least one adverse event (145 [77%] on placebo, 170 [91%] on memantine, and 168 [90%] on trazodone). There were 88 participants with at least one serious adverse event (37 [20%] on memantine, 27 [14%] on trazodone, and 24 [13%] on placebo). A total of 11 serious adverse event led to treatment discontinuation. There was no survival difference between comparisons, with 49 deaths in the memantine group, 52 deaths in the trazodone group, and 48 deaths in the placebo group. INTERPRETATION: Neither memantine nor trazodone improved efficacy outcomes compared with placebo. This result is sufficiently powered to warrant no further testing of trazodone or memantine in motor neuron disease at the doses evaluated in this study. The multiarm multistage design shows important benefits in reducing the time, cost, and participant numbers to reach a definitive result. FUNDING: The Euan MacDonald Centre, MND Scotland, My Name'5 Doddie Foundation, and Baillie Gifford.
The antidepressants trazodone and nefazodone were approved some 4 and 3 decades ago, respectively. Their action is thought to be mediated, at least in part, by inhibition of the serotonin transporter [SERT/solute carrier (SLC)-6A4]. Surprisingly, their mode of action on SERT has not been characterized. Here, we show that, similar to the chemically related drug vilazodone, trazodone and nefazodone are allosteric ligands: trazodone and nefazodone inhibit uptake by and transport-associated currents through SERT in a mixed-competitive and noncompetitive manner, respectively. Contrary to noribogaine and its congeners, all three compounds preferentially interact with the Na(+)-bound outward-facing state of SERT. Nevertheless, they act as pharmacochaperones and rescue the folding-deficient variant SERT-P601A/G602A. The vast majority of disease-associated point mutations of SLC6 family members impair folding of the encoded transporter proteins. Our findings indicate that their folding defect can be remedied by targeting allosteric sites on SLC6 transporters. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The serotonin transporter is a member of the solute carrier-6 family and is the target of numerous antidepressants. Trazodone and nefazodone have long been used as antidepressants. Here, this study shows that their inhibition of the serotonin transporter digressed from the competitive mode seen with other antidepressants. Trazodone and nefazodone rescued a folding-deficient variant of the serotonin transporter. This finding demonstrates that folding defects of mutated solute carrier-6 family members can also be corrected by allosteric ligands.
STUDY OBJECTIVES: we aimed to compare the effects of atomoxetine and trazodone (A-T) in combination with placebo in patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). METHODS: This randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, crossover trial study was conducted in adults with OSA referred to a Sleep Clinic. Participants with eligibility criteria were recruited. Patients were studied on two separate nights with one-week intervals, once treated with trazodone (50 mg) and atomoxetine (80 mg) combination and then with a placebo and the following polysomnography tests. RESULTS: A total of 18 patients with OSA completed the study protocol, 9(50%) were male, the mean age was 47.5 years (SD = 9.8) and the mean Body mass index of participants was 28.4 kg/m2 (SD = 3.4). Compared with the placebo, the A-T combination resulted in significant differences in AHI (28.3(A-T) vs. 42.7 (placebo), p = 0.025), duration of the REM stage (1.3%TST (A-T) vs. 13.1%TST (placebo), p = 0.001), and the number of REM cycles (0.8 (A-T) vs. 4.7 (placebo), p = 0.001), number of apneas (38.3 (A-T) vs. 79.3 (placebo), p = 0.011), number of obstructive apneas (37.2 (A-T) vs. 75.2 (placebo), p = 0.011), oxygen desaturation index (29.5 (A-T) vs. 42.3 (placebo), p = 0.022) and number of respiratory arousals (43.2 (A-T) vs. 68.5 (placebo), p = 0.048). This decrement effect did not change among those with a low-arousal phenotype of OSA. CONCLUSIONS: The A-T combination significantly improved respiratory events' indices compared with placebo in patients with OSA. This combination is recommended to be assessed in a large trial. It could be an alternative for those who do not adhere to the standard available treatments for OSA.
Trazodone is an antidepressant that is FDA-approved for the treatment of depression. It has been used by mental health and primary care providers for the treatment of multiple psychiatric and medical conditions .This review describes trazodone mechanism of action, formulation, dosage and adverse effects and then summarizes the beneficial effects of trazodone in the treatment of various psychiatric and medical conditions such as major depression, as well non-approved FDA indications such as insomnia,anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, feeding and eating disorders, substance use disorders, behavioral disturbances associated with cognitive dysfunction, sexual dysfunction, certain pain conditions, and rehabilitation after acute ischemic stroke. Despite trazodone's favorable effects in the treatment of FDA-unapproved psychiatric and medical conditions, large, randomized controlled clinical trials are still needed to confirm its efficacy in the treatment of the multiple conditions for which it is often used in clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: Trazodone is prescribed for several clinical conditions. Multiple factors may affect trazodone to reach its therapeutic reference range. The concentration-to-dose (C/D) ratio can be used to facilitate the therapeutic drug monitoring of trazodone. The study aimed to investigate factors on the concentrations and C/D ratio of trazodone. METHODS: This study analyzed the therapeutic drug monitoring electronic case information of inpatients in the First Hospital of Hebei Medical University from October 2021 to July 2023. Factors that could affect the concentrations and C/D ratio of trazodone were analyzed, including body mass index, sex, age, smoking, drinking, drug manufacturers, and concomitant drugs. RESULTS: A total of 255 patients were analyzed. The mean age was 52.44 years, and 142 (55.69%) were women. The mean dose of trazodone was 115.29 mg. The mean concentration of trazodone was 748.28 ng/mL, which was in the therapeutic reference range (700-1000 ng/mL). 50.20% of patients reached the reference range, and some patients (36.86%) had concentrations below the reference range. The mean C/D ratio of trazodone was 6.76 (ng/mL)/(mg/d). A significant positive correlation was found between daily dose and trazodone concentrations (r 2 = 0.2885, P < 0.001). Trazodone concentrations were significantly affected by dosage, sex, smoking, drinking, and concomitant drugs of duloxetine or fluoxetine. After dosage emendation, besides the above factors, it was influenced by age ( P < 0.05, P < 0.01, or P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: This study identified factors affecting trazodone concentrations and C/D ratio. The results can help clinicians closely monitor patients on trazodone therapy and maintain concentrations within the reference range.
BACKGROUND: Most antidepressants have a delayed onset of action and must be administered for several weeks to generate therapeutic effects. Trazodone is a serotonin antagonist and reuptake inhibitor approved for the treatment of major depressive disorder. The once-a-day (OAD) formulation of trazodone has an improved tolerability profile compared to its conventional formulations. In this study, we systematically reviewed the evidence available for the antidepressant efficacy and early improvement in depressive symptoms with trazodone OAD treatment. METHOD: We conducted a PubMed database search for randomized controlled trials published from 2005 to 2020. RESULTS: Two studies, a placebo-controlled and an active-comparator (venlafaxine extended-release or XR) study were found. Both the studies demonstrated that trazodone exhibits antidepressant activity at a starting dose of 150 mg/day and results in statistically significant greater reduction in Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D17) scores within 1 week of starting treatment compared to placebo or venlafaxine XR (P < .05). Trazodone also resulted in significant early improvement in the HAM-D17 sleep disturbance factor compared to placebo or venlafaxine XR at day 7 (P < .05). This clinical effect is supported by in vitro proprietary data for the affinity of trazodone for different target receptors. Activity at these receptors may underlie trazodone's fast antidepressant action. CONCLUSIONS: Trazodone, if properly dosed, can be an effective antidepressant with early onset of action and good tolerability. Future studies designed to specifically evaluate onset and timing of improvement of depressive symptoms remain necessary to confirm and extend these results.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: Trazodone is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; however, other mechanisms of the drug's anti-depressive properties have also been postulated. Hence, the aim of the study was to perform a systematic review and assess antiglycoxidative properties of trazodone in in vitro models. METHODS: Trazodone's scavenging and chelating properties were measured with spectrophotometric method. The impact of the drug on carbonyl/oxidative stress was marked in the bovine serum albumin (BSA) model where sugars (glucose, fructose, galactose, ribose) and aldehydes (glyoxal and methylglyoxal) were used as glycation agents. Aminoguanidine and N-acetylcysteine (NAC) were applied as reference glycation/free radical inhibitors. Glycation biomarkers (kynurenine, N-formylkynurenine, dityrosine as well as advanced glycation end products contents) were assessed spectrofluorometrically. Concentrations of oxidation parameters (total thiols (TTs), protein carbonyls (PCs) and also advanced oxidation protein products (AOPPs) levels) were determined spectrophotometrically. RESULTS: We demonstrated that trazodone poorly scavenged radicals (hydroxyl radical, nitric oxide, hydrogen peroxide and 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical) and showed low ferrous ion chelating, unlike aminoguanidine and NAC. Sugars/aldehydes caused enhancement of glycation parameters, as well as a decrease of TTs and an increase of PCs and AOPPs levels compared to BSA incubated alone. Trazodone did not reduce oxidation parameters to the baseline (BSA) and significantly exacerbated glycation markers in comparison with both BSA and BSA+glycators. The content of glycation products was markedly lower in aminoguanidine and NAC than in trazodone. The molecular docking of trazodone to BSA revealed its very low affinity, which may indicate non-specific binding of trazodone, facilitating the attachment of glycation factors. CONCLUSION: According to our findings, it may be concluded that trazodone poorly counteracts oxidation and intensifies glycation in vitro. A possible mechanism for antiglycoxidative effect of trazodone in vivo may be the enhancement of the body's adaptive response, as indicated by the results of our systematic review.
Depression, anxiety and psychomotor performance were assessed in 20 depressed patients during double-blind treatment with amitriptyline or trazodone. There was no difference in onset of antidepressant or anxiolytic action. No decrement or improvement on computerised tasks was found. Dry mouth was significantly more frequent and severe with amitriptyline.
BACKGROUND: Falls are the leading cause of injury-related death among older Americans. While some research has found that insomnia heightens falls, health care resource utilization (HCRU) and costs, the impact of insomnia treatments on fall risk, mortality, HCRU and costs in the elderly population, which could be of substantial interest to payers, has not been fully elucidated. This study evaluated the risk of falls and related consequences among adults >/= 65 years of age treated with common prescription medications for insomnia compared with non-sleep disordered controls. METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort analysis of deidentified Medicare claims from January 2011 through December 2017. Medicare beneficiaries treated for insomnia receiving zolpidem extended-release, zolpidem immediate-release, trazodone, or benzodiazepines were matched with non-sleep disordered controls. The main outcomes were falls, mortality, healthcare resource utilization (HCRU), and medical costs during the 12 months following the earliest fill date for the insomnia medication of interest. Generalized linear models controlled for several key covariates, including age, race, sex, geographic region and Charlson Comorbidity Index score. RESULTS: The study included 1,699,913 Medicare beneficiaries (59.9% female, mean age 75 years). Relative to controls, adjusted analyses showed that beneficiaries receiving insomnia medication experienced over twice as many falls (odds ratio [OR] = 2.34, 95% CI: 2.31-2.36). In adjusted analyses, patients receiving benzodiazepines or trazodone had the greatest risk. Crude all-cause mortality rates were 15-times as high for the insomnia-treated as controls. Compared with controls, beneficiaries receiving insomnia treatment demonstrated higher estimated adjusted mean number of inpatient, outpatient, and emergency department visits and longer length of inpatient stay. All-cause total adjusted mean costs were higher among insomnia treated patients ($967 vs $454). CONCLUSIONS: Individuals receiving insomnia treatment had an increased risk of falls and mortality and higher HCRU and costs compared with matched beneficiaries without sleep disorders. Trazodone and benzodiazepines were associated with the greatest risk of falls. This analysis suggests that significant risks are associated with common, older generation insomnia medication treatments in the elderly. Nonetheless, these results should be interpreted with caution as the use of these medications may be indicative of underlying morbidity with potential for residual confounding.
Trazodone, an antidepressant with antianxiety effects, has been available in the United States since March 1982. Since then 11 cases of priapism, five requiring surgical procedures, have been reported. The authors present one of the latter cases.
AIM: To provide a review of the clinically relevant evidence pertaining to the use of trazodone in major depressive disorder. METHODS: Medline and Cochrane Library searches were searched using the keywords 'trazodone' AND 'depression', to identify the most relevant literature pertinent to the pharmacological properties of trazodone and its use in clinical practice. Articles that were selected included basic pharmacology papers, clinical trials, clinical practice guidelines, and reviews. Related references were cross checked. European and United States prescribing information was reviewed as well. An effort was made to give weight to the information that was most relevant for daily clinical practice. RESULTS: Trazodone is an antidepressant with a mechanism of action that remains innovative and with a favorable profile for the treatment of depression. The appropriate antidepressant doses are usually 150-300 mg/day and are often higher than the doses that are used when trazodone is prescribed to augment the antidepressant effect of another medication, for instance when trazodone is prescribed to address insomnia in a patient treated with an SSRI. Trazodone is usually well tolerated and has a low risk of anticholinergic side effects, weight gain and sexual side effects. DISCUSSION: Trazodone is an established medication that is efficacious for the treatment of a broad array of depressive symptoms, including symptoms that are less likely to respond to other antidepressants (e.g. SSRI), such as insomnia. As an antidepressant, trazodone has proven as efficacious as the tricyclic and second-generation antidepressants and is tolerated relatively well. Trazodone may be helpful for patients with major depression and comorbid insomnia, anxiety or psychomotor agitation. CONCLUSIONS: Trazodone is efficacious antidepressants with a relatively low risks of side effects such as weight gain, sexual or anticholinergic effects (such as constipation, urinary retention, dry mouth). In addition to being able to control a wide range of depressive symptoms, trazodone may improve sleep and be particularly helpful for patients whose symptoms of depression include insomnia.
Dose comparison trials were undertaken with trazodone given once, twice and thrice daily. Therapeutic effects were the same but once daily dosage produced drowsiness whilst thrice daily dosage did not. In a double-blind comparison to imipramine, anti-depressant effects were similar, except at 6 weeks when imipramine was significantly better. There were no significant differences in relief of anxiety symptoms.
Trazodone is used as an antidepressant in doses between 150 and 600 mg. At lower doses, it is commonly used to treat insomnia. There are few case reports about confusional symptoms as an undesirable side effect of this drug. We report a case of a patient who presented with delirium after prescription of trazodone 100 mg. She required hospitalisation but, shortly after discontinuation of trazodone, the symptoms disappeared without antipsychotic medication. Seven months after the episode, the patient remains asymptomatic.
