Triazolam 0.25 mg was compared with nitrazepam 5 mg as a hypnotic for 26 geriatric inpatients in a double-blind cross-over study. Sleep quantity and quality and psychomotor performance were studied. The sleep quantity and quality were similar for both drugs. There were no statistically significant differences between the two drugs in the psychomotor tests. The results are in contrast to results from other studies and might be explained by the composition of the patient material in the present study.
In the past 18 months, there has been considerable controversy regarding the benzodiazepine triazolam (Halcion). To review data supporting or not supporting the assertion that treatment with triazolam results in adverse reactions more frequently than with other benzodiazepines, the author used computerized literature searches (MEDLINE, English language articles from 1975 to the present) to identify reports of behavioral disinhibition, amnesia, delirium, rebound insomnia, and withdrawal reactions on benzodiazepines. Studies of disinhibitory reactions during benzodiazepine treatment do not substantiate the argument that they are more prevalent with triazolam than with other benzodiazepines. The behavioral disinhibition reactions during treatment with benzodiazepines are associated with higher dosages and pretreatment level of hostility. Anterograde amnesia occurs with many benzodiazepines, but usually without changes in a person's normal activities and behaviors. The reports of anterograde amnesia during benzodiazepine treatment describe people performing rather complex tasks during which outside observers could not detect any unusual behaviors. The prevalence of delirium during treatment with triazolam and other benzodiazepines is unclear, but delirium is more frequent at higher dosages and in the elderly. Controlled studies regarding the adverse effects of triazolam on sleep are lacking. The author concludes that despite the considerable adverse publicity in the lay press, there is little scientific evidence that triazolam is associated with disinhibitory or other adverse reactions at a greater frequency than other benzodiazepines.
Zolpidem, which is currently marketed in Europe as a hypnotic, is a short-duration imidazopyridine whose actions are mediated at the gamma-aminobutyric acid benzodiazepine receptor complex. However, zolpidem produces a variety of biochemical differences from classic benzodiazepine agonists including showing selectivity for the central BZ1 (omega 1) receptor subtype as well as showing a different pattern of distribution of binding sites. This study compared zolpidem to the benzodiazepine hypnotic triazolam in 15 healthy male volunteers with histories of sedative drug abuse. Placebo, zolpidem (15, 30 and 45 mg) and triazolam (0.25, 0.5 and 0.75 mg) were administered p.o. in a mixed sequence in a double-blind, cross-over design. The onset time with zolpidem was faster than with triazolam, with peak effects of both drugs occurring at 1 to 2 hr after administration. Both zolpidem and triazolam produced dose-related decrements in performance on various performance tasks including circular lights, reaction time, balance, number recall and the digit symbol substitution test. Both drugs also produced similar dose-related changes on various observer ratings including overall strength of drug effect. Triazolam, but not zolpidem, increased subject- and observer-rated sleepiness and produced greater impairment on a picture memory task. Zolpidem, but not triazolam, produced increases in subject ratings of various somatic symptoms (e.g., dizzy, anxious and queasy) and there were 9 days on which subjects vomited after zolpidem, but none after triazolam. Although the highest dose of both drugs was identified by subjects as being active, the highest dose of triazolam was identified as being barbiturate, benzodiazepine or alcohol, almost twice as often as the highest dose of zolpidem. Overall, this study shows that although zolpidem produces many effects in common with triazolam, it also has a unique profile of effects distinguishable from classic benzodiazepine agonists. The mechanism(s) underlying these differences is unclear, but may be related to the atypical biochemical profile of zolpidem.
A threefold higher area under the plasma drug concentration-time curve (AUC) of nifedipine, a substrate of cytochrome P4503A (CYP3A), has been shown in Southern Asians when compared with Caucasians. To determine if these differences are specific to nifedipine or apply to other substrates of CYP3A, we examined the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 0.375 mg triazolam, another substrate of CYP3A, in eight healthy Caucasians and eight healthy Southern Asians in a double-blind placebo-controlled study. When compared with Caucasians, Southern Asians achieved higher maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) (8.0 +/- 2.6 vs 4.8 +/- 1.9 ng ml-1; the 95% confidence interval (CI) of the mean difference was 0.76 to 5.7; P < 0.01) and had a shorter time to reach maximal concentration (tmax) (45 min (range 30-75) vs 90 min (range 60-145); the 95% CI of the mean difference was -69 to -20; P < 0.002). Triazolam AUC, clearance and partial metabolic clearance did not differ significantly between Southern Asians and Caucasians. Significant differences were found in postural sway after triazolam when compared with placebo in both Caucasians (double stance: eyes open (DSEO): 172.9 +/- 82.9 vs 1138.9 +/- 1182.4; the 95% CI of the mean difference was -1897.2 to -34.4; P < 0.04; and Southern Asians (DSEO: 216.2 +/- 80.9 vs 1086.0 +/- 827.1; the 95% CI of the mean difference was -1564.2 to -175.6; P = 0.02; double stance: eyes closed (DSEC): 207.5 +/- 89.8 vs 1156.9 +/- 932.1; the 95% CI of the mean difference was -1718.5 to -178.5; P = 0.02; with no significant difference between the two ethnic groups. These results suggest that the large inter-ethnic difference in nifedipine clearance are not generalizable to all CYP3A4 substrates.
Eighteen healthy volunteers (10 men and 8 women) participated in a single-dose, double-blind, three-way crossover pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study. Treatment conditions were 0.25 mg of triazolam, a full-agonist benzodiazepine ligand; 10 mg of zolpidem, an imidazopyridine having relative selectivity for the type 1 benzodiazepine receptor subtype; and placebo. Weight-normalized clearance of triazolam was higher in women than in men (8.7 versus 5. 5 ml/min/kg), but the difference was not significant. In contrast, zolpidem clearance was lower in women than in men (3.5 versus 6.7 ml/min/kg, P <.06). Compared to placebo, both active medications produced significant benzodiazepine agonist-like pharmacodynamic effects: sedation, impaired psychomotor performance, impaired information recall, and increased electroencephalographic beta-amplitude. Effects of triazolam and zolpidem in general were comparable and less than 8 h in duration. There was no evidence of a substantial or consistent sex difference in pharmacodynamic effects or in the kinetic-dynamic relationship, although subtle differences could not be ruled out due to low statistical power. The complete dependence of triazolam clearance on CYP3A activity, as opposed to the mixed CYP participation in zolpidem clearance, may explain the differing sex effects on clearance of the two compounds.
Zolpidem is an imidazopyridine hypnotic that is biochemically distinct from classic benzodiazepine agonists in that it may be selective for the BZ1 receptor subtype and shows a different pattern of distribution of binding sites. The present study compared the learning, recall, performance, subject-rated and observer-rated effects of zolpidem, triazolam, and temazepam in 11 healthy humans. Placebo, zolpidem (5, 10, and 20 mg/70 kg), triazolam (0.125, 0.25, and 0.50 mg/70 kg), and temazepam (15, 30, and 60 mg/70 kg) were administered orally in a randomized, double-blind, cross-over design. Zolpidem, triazolam, and temazepam produced orderly dose- and time-related impairment of learning, recall, and performance, and increased subject- and observer-rated estimates of strength of drug effect. The absolute magnitude of these effects at peak effect were comparable across the three compounds. The time to maximal drug effect was faster with zolpidem (0.5-1.0 hours) than with triazolam (1.5-2.0 hours) or temazepam (2-3 hours). These results suggest that despite the somewhat unique benzodiazepine receptor-binding profile of zolpidem, its behavioral and subject-rated effects are similar to those of benzodiazepine hypnotics (i.e., triazolam and temazepam).
Sixty-one healthy men and women, aged 20 to 75 years, received single 0.25-mg doses of triazolam, a cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A substrate benzodiazepine, and placebo in a double-blind crossover study. Among women, age had no significant effect on area under the triazolam plasma concentration curve (AUC) (Spearman r=0.14, P=.44) or clearance (r =-0.09, P=.62). Among men, AUC increased (r=0.43, P <.02) and clearance declined (r=-0.42, P <.02) with increasing age. Gender differences in triazolam kinetics were not apparent. Compared with placebo, triazolam impaired digit-symbol substitution test performance, increased observer-rated sedation, impaired delayed recall of information learned at 1.5 hours after dosing, and increased electroencephalographic beta amplitude. Among men, mean values of relative digit-symbol substitution test decrement (P <.002) and observer-rated sedation (P <.05) were significantly greater in elderly subjects compared with young subjects. Age-dependent differences among women reached significance for observer-rated sedation (P <.02). A combination of higher plasma levels and increased intrinsic sensitivity explained the greater pharmacodynamic effects of triazolam in elderly subjects. Although the findings are consistent with reduced clearance of triazolam in elderly men, individual variability was large and was not explained by identifiable demographic or environmental factors.
The influence of administration of cimetidine (1 g daily for 2 weeks) on the pharmacokinetics of alprazolam (0.5 mg t.i.d. for 1 week) and triazolam (0.5 mg nightly for 1 week) was investigated in two groups of 8 healthy subjects. The plasma AUC of these triazolobenzodiazepines were significantly increased. Moreover, for triazolam, the C max was increased and the plasma elimination half-life was prolonged; oral clearance of the two triazolobenzodiazepines was markedly reduced. It is suggested that the combined treatment cimetidine-alprazolam requires a reduced daily dosage (one third) of alprazolam or increased dosage intervals (b.i.d. instead of t.i.d.). For triazolam, used as a hypnotic drug, such dosage reduction appears unsuitable if administered on a once-nightly basis.
This review was conducted to identify the current data on drug interactions with alprazolam, midazolam, and triazolam to guide practitioners in the use of these drugs. The Medline electronic database from 1966 through 1998 was used to identify clinical studies of the pharmacokinetic effect of drugs on these three benzodiazepines. Of a total of 491 literature reports identified, 59 prospective studies met our selection criteria. The pharmacokinetic parameters of AUC, Cmax, t1/2, and tmax were evaluated for changes following an interaction. To allow comparison between studies, changes in the parameters were normalized relative to the control values. Pharmacodynamic effects and measures, when reported in the original studies as statistically significant, were classified as a strong interaction, and when the interaction was present but not statistically significant, they were classified as mild in this review. As a result, clinically significant drug interactions were noted for all three benzodiazepines, although it is clear that statistically significant pharmacokinetic changes do not always translate into clinically significant pharmacodynamic consequences. All three benzodiazepines were susceptible to drug interactions, but oral dosing of midazolam and triazolam resulted in greater alterations in the pharmacokinetic parameters than alprazolam due to their larger presystemic extraction. Ketoconazole and itraconazole were found to be the most potent metabolic inhibitors that prolonged the duration of or intensified the magnitude of the dynamic response produced by the three benzodiazepines. Rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin were noted to be potent metabolic inducers, and their treatments result in loss of benzodiazepine therapeutic efficacy. In conclusion, potent metabolic inhibitors and inducers can either significantly prolong or diminish the dynamic effects of benzodiazepines via their influence on the pharmacokinetics of benzodiazepines.
This study was designed to determine whether differences in alpha-1 acid glycoprotein and free drug concentrations result in an altered response to triazolam. Twelve normal-weight and 12 obese adult male subjects received intravenous doses of triazolam, 0.5 mg, on two occasions separated by 1 week. There was a small difference in the alpha-1 acid glycoprotein concentrations between groups but no difference in free fraction of triazolam. There was a longer terminal half-life (t1/2 beta) in the obese subjects (3.16 +/- 0.87 vs. 3.83 +/- 1.24, p = 0.0098). Overall, week 1 data revealed no difference in effect between normal and obese subjects. However, response data reveal a pattern of increased sensitivity with the second exposure to triazolam. For example, area under the effect curve (AUEC) on all tests was significantly greater in week 2 for both groups of subjects. For a memory test and sedation from 0 to 12 hours, AUEC/free AUC ratios were significantly greater in week 2 for all subjects. The obese had a higher ratio on week 2 than on week 1 for all psychomotor tests and sedation (0 to 4.5 hours; p < 0.05). The results of modeling psychomotor impairment-concentration data pooled by group for each week continue the pattern: week 1 data are similar between the obese and normal-weight subjects. Although EC50 values are up to 15% lower in week 2 for the normal-weight subjects, EC50 values are as much as 66% lower in week 2 for the obese, where a lower EC50 indicates greater sensitivity. Logistic regression of the recognition data is consistent with these results.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
The psychomotor/cognitive performance, subject-rated, and observer-rated effects of single oral doses of the benzodiazepine hypnotic triazolam (0.125, 0.25, and 0.5 mg/70 kg) and the imidazopyridine hypnotic zolpidem (5, 10, and 20 mg/70 kg) were compared in 11 volunteers, in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design. Triazolam and zolpidem produced similar dose-related decrements on several performance measures, and similar dose-related increases on most observer-rated and several subject-rated measures. The drugs differed in the time course of their effects on these measures; the effects of zolpidem typically peaked 30 min earlier (1-1.5 h postdrug) than the effects of triazolam (1.5-2 h postdrug). Triazolam and zolpidem produced a different profile of effects on other performance measures which could not be attributed to time course differences. Triazolam produced significantly more impairment than zolpidem in time estimation. Triazolam, but not zolpidem, produced significant impairment on a short-term memory task. Zolpidem produced significantly more impairment than triazolam on several novel measures of performance on a computerized trail-making test. The observed differences between triazolam and zolpidem may be related to zolpidem's reported binding selectivity for the omega 1 receptor subtype.
The microphysiological system (MPS) is a promising tool for predicting drug disposition in humans, although limited information is available on the quantitative assessment of sequential drug metabolism in MPS and its extrapolation to humans. In the present study, we first constructed a mechanism-based pharmacokinetic model for triazolam (TRZ) and its metabolites in the entero-hepatic two-organ MPS, composed of intestinal Caco-2 and hepatic HepaRG cells, and attempted to extrapolate the kinetic information obtained with the MPS to the plasma concentration profiles in humans. In the two-organ MPS and HepaRG single culture systems, TRZ was found to be metabolized into alpha- and 4-hydroxytriazolam and their respective glucuronides. All these metabolites were almost completely reduced in the presence of a CYP3A inhibitor, itraconazole, confirming sequential phase I and II metabolism. Both pharmacokinetic model-dependent and -independent analyses were performed, providing consistent results regarding the metabolic activity of TRZ: clearance of glucuronidation metabolites in the two-organ MPS was higher than that in the single culture system. The plasma concentration profile of TRZ and its two hydroxy metabolites in humans was quantitatively simulated based on the pharmacokinetic model, by incorporating several scaling factors representing quantitative gaps between the MPS and humans. Thus, the present study provided the first quantitative extrapolation of sequential drug metabolism in humans by combining MPS and pharmacokinetic modeling.
Zaleplon, a pyrazolopyrimidine that is under development as a hypnotic, produces its pharmacological effects at the benzodiazepine-recognition site on the GABA(A) benzodiazepine-receptor complex. Unlike most benzodiazepines, zaleplon binds selectively to the BZ1 (omega1) subtype of the benzodiazepine receptor. The present study compared the acute subject-rated effects, performance-impairing effects, and abuse potential of zaleplon and triazolam, a triazolobenzodiazepine hypnotic, in 14 healthy volunteers with histories of drug abuse. Zaleplon (25, 50, and 75 mg), triazolam (0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 mg) and placebo were administered orally in this double-blind, crossover study. Zaleplon and triazolam produced comparable dose-related effects on several subject-rated drug-effect questionnaires. Zaleplon and triazolam also produced comparable dose-dependent decrements on several performance tasks including balance, circular lights, digit-enter and recall, DSST, picture recall/recognition and repeated acquisition. Same-day and next-day subject-rated measures reflecting abuse potential (e.g., drug liking, good effects, and monetary street value) also suggest that zaleplon and triazolam were comparable. The only notable between-drug difference observed in the present study was that the time-action function of zaleplon differed from that of triazolam. The onset time, time to maximum drug effect, and duration of action were shorter with zaleplon than triazolam. Thus, despite its non-benzodiazepine structure and unique benzodiazepine-receptor binding profile, the behavioral pharmacological profile of zaleplon is similar to that of triazolam.
RATIONALE: The imidazopyridine hypnotic zolpidem may produce less memory and cognitive impairment than classic benzodiazepines, due to its relatively low binding affinity for the benzodiazepine receptor subtypes found in areas of the brain which are involved in learning and memory. OBJECTIVES: The study was designed to compare the acute effects of single oral doses of zolpidem (5, 10, 20 mg/70 kg) and the benzodiazepine hypnotic triazolam (0.125, 0.25, and 0.5 mg/70 kg) on specific memory and attentional processes. METHODS: Drug effects on memory for target (i.e., focal) information and contextual information (i.e., peripheral details surrounding a target stimulus presentation) were evaluated using a source monitoring paradigm, and drug effects on selective attention mechanisms were evaluated using a negative priming paradigm, in 18 healthy volunteers in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design. RESULTS: Triazolam and zolpidem produced strikingly similar dose-related effects on memory for target information. Both triazolam and zolpidem impaired subjects' ability to remember whether a word stimulus had been presented to them on the computer screen or whether they had been asked to generate the stimulus based on an antonym cue (memory for the origin of a stimulus, which is one type of contextual information). The results suggested that triazolam, but not zolpidem, impaired memory for the screen location of picture stimuli (spatial contextual information). Although both triazolam and zolpidem increased overall reaction time in the negative priming task, only triazolam increased the magnitude of negative priming relative to placebo. CONCLUSIONS: The observed differences between triazolam and zolpidem have implications for the cognitive and pharmacological mechanisms underlying drug-induced deficits in specific memory and attentional processes, as well for the cognitive and brain mechanisms underlying these processes.
Reports of adverse behavioral reactions to triazolam, a triazolobenzodiazepine ultra-short-acting hypnotic, were examined in the postmarketing surveillance Spontaneous Reporting System of the Food and Drug Administration. Reports for triazolam of confusion, amnesia, bizarre behavior, agitation, and hallucinations were compared with reports of these reactions for temazepam, another short-acting hypnotic. Analysis of individual case reports from marketing through 1985 for triazolam vs temazepam showed 133 vs two for confusion, 109 vs three for amnesia, 59 vs two for bizarre behavior, 58 vs four for agitation, and 40 vs one for hallucinations. Considering extent of use, reporting rates for triazolam were 22 to 99 times those for temazepam, depending on the reaction. Reactions to triazolam tended to occur at higher doses and in older patients. This and an updated analysis of aggregate reports for the first 7 years of marketing of each drug with reporting rates and adjustment for various factors suggest a higher occurrence of these reactions with triazolam, but selection factors cannot be completely ruled out. When treating insomnia, physicians should emphasize sleep hygiene practices as alternatives to drug therapy; if drug therapy is required, they should prescribe hypnotics at the lowest recommended doses for the shortest clinically necessary durations and discontinue medication use should any adverse reactions occur.
