After 25 years of use in the United States, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is widely prescribed for various indications. By virtue of sequential blockade of microbial folic acid synthesis, the antimicrobial combination has excellent in vitro inhibitory activity against many common respiratory and urinary tract pathogens, as well as many nosocomial infecting strains. In patients infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, TMP-SMX provides prophylactic and therapeutic potency against Pneumocystis carinii but at the risk of frequent side effects. TMP-SMX is also used for treatment of pulmonary and disseminated nocardiosis and some forms of Wegener's granulomatosis, as well as for prophylaxis of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Increasing bacterial resistance and concern about occasional severe adverse effects suggest that the usefulness of TMP-SMX may diminish in the future.
A new series of trimethoprim (TMP) analogs containing amide bonds (1-6) have been synthesized. Molecular docking, as well as dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) inhibition assay were used to confirm their affinity to bind dihydrofolate reductase enzyme. Data from the ethidium displacement test showed their DNA-binding capacity. Tests confirming the possibility of DNA binding in a minor groove as well as determination of the association constants were performed using calf thymus DNA, T4 coliphage DNA, poly (dA-dT)(2) and poly (dG-dC)(2). Additionally, the mechanism of action of the new compounds was studied. In conclusion, some of our new analogs inhibited DHFR activity more strongly than TMP did, which confirms, that the addition of amide bonds into the analogs of TMP increases their affinity towards DHFR.
An NMR spectroscopic method for the determination of mixtures of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole is described. Spectra are determined in dimethylsulfoxide-d6, containing 1,4-dinitrobenzene as an internal standard. Both synthetic mixtures and commercial formulations were assayed, and the results were compared to those obtained using the BP procedure.
A high-performance liquid chromatographic method for the determination of trimethoprim, sulfamethoxazole and its metabolite and a series of structurally related sulfonamides is described. The half-life time of elimination of sulfamethoxazole and its metabolite N4-acetylsulfamethoxazole is 9 h for both compounds. The renal excretion rate of sulfamethoxazole depends strongly on the urinary pH. The renal excretion rate of the metabolite N4-acetylsulfamethoxazole is not dependent on the urinary pH.
The solubilities of trimethoprim in solutions with different pH values decreased in the presence of sulfamethoxazole, while that of the latter increased in the presence of the first. The dissolution rate of trimethoprim in HCl (0.1 mol/1) was the same in the presence and absence of sulfamethoxazole. That of sulfamethoxazole however, decreased in the presence of trimethoprim. The different reasons were explained.
The oviductal and plasma levels of trimethoprim (TMP) and sulfamethoxazole (SMZ) were studied in 9 women after oral and i.v. administration of a drug combination (Eusaprim R, Wellcome Foundation Ltd). The concentration of TMP in a healthy endosalpinx was found to be twice as high (4.7 microgram/g, range 2.8-8.3) as in plasma (2.6 microgram/ml, range 2.1-3.6). Conversely, the endosalpingeal level of SMZ (38 microgram/g, range 12-65) was about half that in plasma (77 microgram/ml, range 58-95). The agar well diffusion method was used for the concentration determinations. The specimens were collected during surgery for non-infectious genital diseases. The implication of treatment by the given drugs is discussed.
In view of the rising relevance of emerging pollutants in the environment, this work studies the photodegradation of three antibiotics, evaluating the effects of the pH of the medium and the concentration of dissolved organic matter. Simulated light (with a spectrum similar to that of natural sunlight) was applied to the antibiotics Ciprofloxacin (Cip), Clarithromycin (Cla) and Trimethoprim (Tri), at three different pH, and in the presence of different concentrations of humic acids. The sensitivity to light followed the sequence: Cip > Cla > Tri, which was inverse for the half-life (Tri > Cla > Cip). As the pH increased, the half-life generally decreased, except for Cla. Regarding the kinetic constant k, in the case of Cip and Tri it increased with the rise of pH, while decreased for Cla. The results corresponding to total organic carbon (TOC) indicate that the complete mineralization of the antibiotics was not achieved. The effect of humic acids was not marked, slightly increasing the degradation of Cip, and slightly decreasing it for Tri, while no effect was detected for Cla. These results may be relevant in terms of understanding the evolution of these antibiotics, especially when they reach different environmental compartments and receive sunlight radiation.
After the administration of various antimicrobial agents for chemotherapeutic purposes a general change in the intestinal flora of the patient is often observed. In contrast, the combination trimethoprim-sulphonamide causes in most cases a strong selective decrease in the number of Enterobacteriaceae organisms for treatment periods as long as four to 12 weeks. The results correspond to clinical experience with trimethoprim-sulphonamide therapy in urinary tract infection where reinfections with resistant organisms are the exception.
A variety of different mechanisms are known to be responsible for either natural or acquired resistance to trimethoprim, the sulfonamides, or trimethoprim-sulfonamide combinations. Some mechanisms of obvious clinical importance have been studied intensively. Among these are unique bypass mechanisms such as the synthesis of drug-resistant, plasmid-coded dihydrofolate reductase or dihydropteroate synthetase; such mechanisms so far have not been encountered in studies of resistance to other drugs. This article focuses on several mechanisms of resistance that have rarely been discussed in the past, including metabolic alteration of trimethoprim or the sulfonamides and hyperproduction of p-aminobenzoic acid, and on the simultaneous presence of more than one mechanism. The role of these mechanisms in the resistance of clinical isolates requires further investigation.
The machine learning program GOLEM from the field of inductive logic programming was applied to the drug design problem of modeling structure-activity relationships. The training data for the program were 44 trimethoprim analogues and their observed inhibition of Escherichia coli dihydrofolate reductase. A further 11 compounds were used as unseen test data. GOLEM obtained rules that were statistically more accurate on the training data and also better on the test data than a Hansch linear regression model. Importantly machine learning yields understandable rules that characterized the chemistry of favored inhibitors in terms of polarity, flexibility, and hydrogen-bonding character. These rules agree with the stereochemistry of the interaction observed crystallographically.
The bivariate calibration algorithm was applied to the spectrophotometric simultaneous determination of trimethoprim (TMP), sulfamethoxazole (SMX) or sulphamethoxypyridazine (SMP) binary mixtures in pharmaceutical and veterinary products. The results obtained were compared with those from derivative spectrophotometry. The statistical evaluation of the method bias showed that the proposed procedure is comparable with commonly used first-derivative spectrophotometry. However, the advantage of bivariate calibration is its simplicity, due to the minimal spectra manipulation when compared with derivative techniques.
The preparation of a wide variety of 6-substituted trimethoprim analogues was readily accomplished by the reaction of 2,4-diamino-6-substituted-pyrimidines with 2,6-dimethoxy-4-[(N,N-dimethylamino)methyl]phenol at 120--160 degrees C. The less reactive 2,6-dialkyl-4-[(N,N-dimethylamino)methyl]phenols reacted successfully with 2,4-diamino-6-(alkylthio)pyrimidines to give 5-(substituted benzyl)pyrimidines. The phenolic groups of the products were alkylated in high yield when a nonreactive 6-substituent was present in the pyrimidine ring. 6-(Alkylthio) groups were easily removed with Raney nickel. Trimethoprim was thus obtained in high yield from its 6-(methylthio) counterpart. The 6-substituted trimethoprim analogues all had low activity as inhibitors of Escherichia coli dihydrofolate reductase and as antibacterial agents.
Trimethoprim has recently been marketed as a single-entity product for the treatment of initial episodes of uncomplicated symptomatic urinary tract infections; it was previously available only in combination with sulfamethoxazole. Trimethoprim exerts antimicrobial activity by blocking the reduction of dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate, the active form of folic acid, by susceptible organisms. It has inhibitory activity for most gram-positive aerobic cocci and some gram-negative aerobic bacilli. Resistance to trimethoprim may be either intrinsic or acquired. Acquired resistance most commonly stems from a chromosomal mutation that results in the production of a dihydrofolate reductase enzyme which is less vulnerable to trimethoprim inhibition. Gastrointestinal intolerance and skin eruptions are the most common untoward reactions resulting from the administration of trimethoprim. Trimethoprim constitutes very effective therapy for women with acute symptomatic urinary tract infections caused by E. coli, and the compound compares favorably with alternative standard agents, such as ampicillin and cephalexin. The safety of trimethoprim in the pregnant woman has not been established. Since indiscriminate use of trimethoprim could foster the emergence of trimethoprim resistance, thereby negating the value of both trimethoprim and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim should only be prescribed for well defined indications. Trimethoprim is currently being investigated as definitive therapy for a wide range of infections, including bacterial exacerbations of chronic bronchitis, bacterial pneumonia, and typhoid fever. Initial reports are encouraging.
