The acute effects of trimipramine on sleep EEG patterns were investigated in six depressed inpatients and six healthy volunteers. The effects of long-term administration were then assessed in depressed patients after 4 weeks of treatment. Sedative effects of the drug were more pronounced in healthy subjects while sleep parameters of depressed patients seemed less sensitive to the drug. Chronic effects tended to correct most of the sleep disturbances seen in depressed subjects with respect to the natural organization of sleep. The major sleep effect of trimipramine concerned REM latency which was lengthened in both groups, independently of the treatment protocol.
RATIONALE: The antidepressant trimipramine shows an atypical pharmacological profile and its mechanism of action is still obscure. OBJECTIVES: The present study investigated whether trimipramine and three of its metabolites interact with targets of other antidepressants, namely, the human monoamine transporters for noradrenaline (hNAT), serotonin (hSERT), and dopamine (hDAT), and with the human organic cation transporters (hOCT1, hOCT2, and hOCT3) which are expressed in the brain and are known to be involved in the uptake of monoamines. METHODS: HEK293 cells heterologously expressing the abovementioned transporters were used to determine the inhibition of [(3)H]MPP(+) uptake by trimipramine and its main metabolites. RESULTS: At concentrations up to 30 muM, all transporters, except hOCT3, were inhibited by all examined substances. With IC(50) values between 2 and 10 muM, trimipramine inhibited hSERT, hNAT, hOCT1, and hOCT2, whereas clearly higher concentrations were needed for half-maximal inhibition of hDAT. Desmethyl-trimipramine showed about the same potencies as trimipramine, whereas 2-hydroxy-trimipramine was less potent at hNAT, hSERT, and hOCT1. Trimipramine-N-oxide preferentially inhibited hSERT. CONCLUSIONS: Neither trimipramine nor its metabolites are highly potent inhibitors of the examined monoamine transporters. However, since at a steady state the sum of the concentrations of the parent compound and its active metabolites is almost two times higher than the plasma concentration of trimipramine and since it is known that tricyclic antidepressants accumulate in the brain (up to tenfold), at least partial inhibition by trimipramine and its metabolites of hSERT and hNAT (but not of hOCT3) may contribute to the antidepressant action of trimipramine.
Eight healthy subjects were examined in random order with an electronic capsule transducer, two capsules being mounted 8 cm from each other in the duodenum. At least two grade III maximal pressure waves were recorded following 0.6 mg l-hyoscyamine (Hassle), 50 mg trimipramine (Surmontil, Rhone Poulenc) or 150 mg ranitidine (Glaxo-Nyegaard & Co.) perorally. A significant prolonged cyclic length (Fig. 1) was observed on the day when l-hyoscyamine was given when compared to results on the day when placebo was given (Table I). No significant differences were observed between placebo and the other drugs given.
Zopiclone is a new sedative showing a rapid onset of hypnotic effect and a relatively short duration of action. The goal of this study was to assess the kinetic parameters of zopiclone and its interaction with trimipramine when administered concomitantly. Ten normal subjects each received doses of zopiclone (7.5 mg), trimipramine (50 mg), and zopiclone (7.5 mg) + trimipramine (50 mg) orally at 7-day intervals. The absorption of zopiclone was rapid, the observed plasma peak concentration and 95 per cent of all absorption occurring within one hour. The average elimination half-life was 3.8 +/- 0.2 h. The volunteers reported a bitter taste at an average of 24 min after zopiclone administration at which time concentrations in saliva were approximately 50 ng ml-1. Trimipramine decreased the relative bioavailability determined for zopiclone by 13.7 per cent, while zopiclone decreased the relative bioavailability of trimipramine by an average of 26.6 per cent, although neither of these changes was statistically significant (p greater than 0.05); there were no substantial changes in other kinetic parameters. It is concluded that zopiclone presents advantages over some other sedative drugs as it is rapidly absorbed and eliminated. When zopiclone is administered with trimipramine, the decrease in the relative bioavailability of trimipramine may be clinically significant.
After a 1-week placebo washout, 25 depressed hospitalized patients were treated for 4 weeks with trimipramine or doxepin in a fixed equivalent dosage schedule ending in 150 mg h.s. The study used a parallel group double-blind design. Comparisons over time revealed that both drugs improved patients' overall well-being as indicated by the rating scales studied. Significant (p less than .05) differences between the treatments favored trimipramine over doxepin: the Hamilton scale diurnal variation cluster at Week 1 and the sleep disturbance factor at Week 4; the Clinical Global Impressions improvement index at Week 1; and the Anxiety Status Inventory somatic symptoms cluster at Week 4. No differences in blood pressure, heart rate, PVCs, or PACs were observed in any of the comparisons. The total number of side effects reported was greater in the doxepin-treated patients.
The intake of antidepressants is often accompanied by weight gain. Antidepressants may influence lipid and carbohydrate metabolism that can result in metabolic changes and obesity. We investigated the effect of citalopram and trimipramine on interstitial glycerol, glucose and lactate concentration and blood flow in subcutaneous adipose tissue of obese subjects by means of the microdialysis technique. In addition, the effect of stimulation with norepinephrine on metabolic response was investigated. Each subject was compared to a control subject matched for BMI and age. Each group comprised 10 subjects. Circulating plasma triglyceride concentrations were higher in drug-treated groups. In subcutaneous adipose tissue, microdialysis experiments revealed a higher and prolonged glycerol release in the presence of norepinephrine, but not under basal conditions. In citalopram treated subjects, basal glucose and lactate concentrations were higher compared with controls or with the trimipramine treated group. Local administration of norepinephrine induced a decrease in glucose levels and an increase in lactate levels, but without significant differences between groups. Local adipose tissue blood flow decreased in control groups following norepinephrine application, but remained constant in the antidepressant groups. In conclusion, citalopram and trimipramine affected glucose and lipid metabolism in adipose tissue and resulted in enhanced release of glycerol and free fatty acids into the circulation.
OBJECTIVE: The tricyclic antidepressant trimipramine is one of the drugs with the most pronounced differences in pharmacokinetics caused by the CYP2D6 genetic polymorphism. However, the effect of CYP2D6 genotype on steady state kinetics and on bioavailability has not been studied so far. In addition, we were interested in trimipramine pharmacokinetics in genetically defined ultra rapid metabolizers. METHODS: We studied intravenous and multiple dose oral application of 50 mg trimipramine in five, seven, and three healthy volunteers with CYP2D6 genotypes predicting deficient, highly active and ultrarapid metabolism. The latter group included carriers of one wild-type and one duplication allele. Trimipramine and desmethyltrimipramine concentrations were measured by HPLC over a time interval of 72 h after intravenous and after one oral application. RESULTS: Both bioavailability and systemic clearance significantly depended on CYP2D6 genotype with a linear gene dose relationship. Mean bioavailability was 44, 16 and 12% in carriers of zero, two and three active genes of CYP2D6, respectively, and the corresponding data for systemic clearance were 12.0, 24.2, and 30.3 l/h. Consequently, the mean total oral clearances were 27.3, 151, and 253 l/h in poor, extensive and ultrarapid metabolizers. CONCLUSIONS: High bioavailability combined with low systemic clearance of trimipramine in poor metabolizers of CYP2D6 substrates results in a very high exposure to trimipramine with the risk of adverse drug reactions. On the other hand, the extremely high systemic and presystemic elimination may result in sub-therapeutic drug concentrations in carriers of CYP2D6 gene duplications with a high risk of poor therapeutic response.
In a 4-week double-blind clinical trial we compared the effects of the tricyclic antidepressants trimipramine and imipramine on the sleep EEG and on nocturnal bormone secretion in 20 male inpatients with major depression. Both treatments produced rapid significant clinical improvement in depression without severe adverse effects. However, the two drugs had markedly different neurobiologic profiles. Trimipramine enhanced rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and slow wave sleep, whereas imipramine suppressed REM sleep and showed no effect on slow wave sleep. Total sleep time and the sleep efficiency index increased under trimipramine but not under imipramine. Nocturnal cortisol secretion decreased with trimipramine but remained unchanged with imipramine. In contrast to imipramine, trimipramine induced an increase in prolactin secretion compatible with its known antagonism at dopamine (D2) receptors. Imipramine induced a decrease in growth hormone secretion during the first half of the night. Neither of the drugs induced significant changes in plasma testosterone concentration. We conclude that trimipramine is an antidepressant with sleep-improving qualities that possibly acts through inhibition of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical system activity by a yet unknown mechanism.
Trimipramine (TMP) is an antidepressant drug used for the treatment of a variety of depressive states and other psychiatric disorders. It has been already detected in the aquatic environment. Currently, no further knowledge is available on fate and effects of TMP in the aquatic environment. Therefore, we studied the biodegradability of TMP and of its photolysis transformation products (PTPs) generated by irradiation with polychromatic UV light in aqueous solution. Different conditions including initial drug concentration, pH, and temperature were applied during TMP photolysis. Subsequently, the time courses of TMP and dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentrations were monitored throughout the whole photo-degradation process. Then, high-resolution mass spectrometry was used to identify and elucidate the structures of the resulting PTPs. After that, the two standardized biodegradation tests, Closed Bottle test (CBT; OECD 301 D) and Manometric Respirometry test (MRT; OECD 301 F), were performed for TMP and its photolytic mixtures to assess the biodegradability of TMP and its PTPs. Finally, the toxicity of TMP and its photolytic mixtures was predicted using different quantitative structure activity relationship (QSAR) software. It was found that after 128 min of UV-irradiation, 91.8% of TMP at the initial concentration of 100 mg L(-1) was eliminated with only 23.9% removal in the DOC. So, it can be pointed out that more than 65% of the degraded TMP is transformed to new non-mineralized PTPs. 14 new PTPs were detected in TMP's photolytic mixtures. Their supposed structures indicate that the proposed photo-transformation pathway is mainly by hydroxylation. The statistical analysis confirms that the differences in the degradation rates of TMP as a function of concentration, pH, and temperature are statistically significant in most cases investigated here. In biodegradation testing, TMP and its PTPs are classified as not readily biodegradable, while LC-MS analysis revealed some PTPs to be eliminated more than TMP itself. Results from QSAR analysis confirmed that some of the PTPs could be biodegradable, and revealed that some of the non-biodegradable PTPs may be human and/or eco-toxic, posing a risk to the environment. Our findings show that TMP under UV-irradiation could lead to the formation of some more easily biodegradable PTPs and some others toxic and non-biodegradable PTPs. Therefore, further studies should be conducted regarding the fate and effects of TMP and its PTPs elucidated in this study on human health and on the environment.
Steady state plasma concentrations of the (L)- and (D)-enantiomers of trimipramine (TRI), desmethyltrimipramine (DTRI), 2-hydroxytrimipramine (TRIOH) and 2-hydroxydesmethyl-trimipramine (DTRIOH) were measured in 27 patients receiving between 300 and 400 mg/day racemic TRI. The patients were phenotyped with dextromethorphan and mephenytoin, and the 8-hour urinary ratios of dextromethorphan/dextrorphan, dextromethorphan/3-methoxymorphinan, and (S)-mephenytoin/(R)mephenytoin were used as markers of cytochrome P-450IID6 (CYP2D6), CYP3A4/5 and CYP2C19 activities, respectively. One patient was a CYP2D6 and one was a CYP2C19 poor metabolizer. A stereoselectivity in the metabolism of TRI has been found, with a preferential N-demethylation of (D)-TRI and a preferential hydroxylation of (L)-TRI. CYP2D6 appears to be involved in the 2-hydroxylation of (L)-TRI, (L)DTRI and (D)-DTRI, but not of (D)-TRI, as significant correlations were measured between the dextromethorphan/dextrorphan ratios and the (L)-TRI/(L)-TRIOH (r = 0.45, p = 0.019), the (L)-DTRI/(L)-DTRIOH (r = 0.47, p = 0.014), and the (D)-DTRI/(D)-DTRIOH (r = 0.51, p = 0.006), but not with the (D)-TRI/(D)-TRIOH ratios (r = 0.29, NS). CYP2C19, but not CYP2D6, appears to be involved in the demethylation pathway, with a stereoselectivity toward the (D)-enantiomer of TRI, as a significant positive correlation was calculated between the mephenytoin (S)/(R) ratios and the concentrations to dose-to-weight ratios of (D)-TRI (r = 0.69, p = 0.00006). CYP3A4/5 appears to be involved in the metabolism of (L)-TRI to a presently not determined metabolite. The CYP2D6 poor metabolizer had the highest (L)-DTRI and (D)-DTRI concentrations to dose-to-weight ratios, and the CYP2C19 poor metabolizer had the highest (L)-TRI and (D)-TRI concentrations to dose-to-weight ratios of the group.
A novel method based on three-phase hollow fiber microextraction technique (HF-LPME) coupled with electrospray ionization-ion mobility spectrometry (ESI-IMS) was developed for the simultaneous determination of two antidepressant drugs (trimipramine and desipramine) in urine and plasma samples. The effects of various parameters such as type of organic solvent, composition of donor and acceptor phase, stirring rate, salt addition, extraction time, and temperature were investigated. Under the optimized conditions, the relative standard deviation was in the range of 5-6%, and the method quantitation limit (MQL) of utilizing HF-LPME/ESI-IMS was 5 mug/L for both drugs. The relative recoveries obtained by the proposed method from urine and plasma samples were in the range 94% to 97% for trimipramine and 92% to 96% for desipramine. Finally, the feasibility of the proposed method was successfully confirmed by extraction and determination of trace amounts of trimipramine and desipramine in biological samples without any significant matrix effect.
A 5-week placebo washout comparison of trimipramine 150 mg/day and maprotiline 150 mg/day was carried out in 15 male and 24 female patients with unipolar major affective disorder. There were no significant differences between the two groups in age, sex, weight, height, or vital signs. Both groups showed significant improvement over time, with no difference between the groups on the Severity and Improvement factors of the Clinical Global Impression scale, on the total and factor subscales of the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, and on the Anxiety Status Inventory. The maprotiline group showed a greater increase in weight over the study period than did the trimipramine group. There was a significant lowering of systolic blood pressure in the trimipramine group only and a significant and linear increase in pulse rate by Week 3 in the maprotiline group. Analysis of ECG showed that the atrial rates were significantly increased in the maprotiline group (p less than .002) but not in the trimipramine group. Trimipramine had significantly fewer anticholinergic, neurologic, and cardiovascular adverse effects than maprotiline.
A simple procedure is described that permits the simultaneous determination of trimipramine and its two major metabolites, desmethyl- and hydroxytrimipramine, in human plasma or red blood cells (RBCs) at therapeutic concentrations. The extracted biological fluids are injected into a capillary gas chromatograph with an OV-1 fused-silica column coupled to a nitrogen-phosphorus-selective detector. The limit of determination for trimipramine is 3 ng/ml and for that desmethyl- and hydroxytrimipramine is 4 ng/ml. The method permits the RBC/plasma ratios to be determined and to be correlated with the clinical response.
An Amberlite XAD-2 (XAD2) and titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TNPs) modified glassy carbon paste electrode (XAD2-TNP-GCPE) was developed for the determination of imipramine (IMI), trimipramine (TRI) and desipramine (DES). The electrochemical behavior of these molecules was investigated employing cyclic voltammetry (CV), chronocoulometry (CC), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and adsorptive stripping differential pulse voltammetry (AdSDPV). After optimization of analytical conditions using a XAD2-TNP-GCPE electrode at pH 6.0 phosphate buffer (0.1 M), the peak currents were found to vary linearly with its concentration in the range of 1.30 x 10(-9) to 6.23 x 10(-6) M for IMI, 1.16 x 10(-9) to 6.87 x 10(-6) M for TRI and 1.43 x 10(-9) to 5.68 x 10(-6) M for DES. The detection limits (S/N = 3) of 3.93 x 10(-10), 3.51 x 10(-10) and 4.35 x 10(-10) M were obtained for IMI, TRI and DES respectively using AdSDPV. The prepared modified electrode showed several advantages such as a simple preparation method, high sensitivity, very low detection limits and excellent reproducibility. The proposed method was employed for the determination of IMI, TRI and DES in pharmaceutical formulations, blood serum and urine samples.
The effects of scopolamine, an anticholinergic drug, of trimipramine, a tricyclic antidepressant with both anticholinergic and sedative properties, of diazepam and a placebo, on explicit memory and repetition priming were assessed using a free-recall task and a word-stem completion task. Forty-eight healthy volunteers took part in this double-blind study. Diazepam provoked a dissociation between free recall, which was profoundly impaired, and word completion, which was spared. No significant changes in memory performances were observed in the scopolamine group; however, a significant correlation between explicit and implicit memory performances was observed in this group. At the low dose used, the effects of trimipramine on memory were mild. The results suggest that the cholinergic system is involved in the priming effect.
Previous blind studies have shown an increased rate of healing of both duodenal and gastric ulcers following 4 weeks peroral administration of 50 mg trimipramine. The present study shows the effect of 50 mg trimipramine perorally on gastric secretion in relation to that of 25 mg of the drug and placebo. At regular intervals blood specimens were obtained for determination of the serum concentration of trimipramine. In 9 healthy young students it was found that the estimated stabilized values of volume and acid output following 50 mg trimipramine, 33 ml and 3.9 mmol/15 min, respectively, were significantly lower than those following the smallest dose, 37 ml and 4.6 mmol/15 min, respectively. On the other hand, no significant changes of gastric secretion were observed following the peroral administration of 25 mg trimipramine when compared to placebo. Following 50 mg trimipramine the output of pepsin was reduced by about 25%. The values of serum concentration of trimipramine were about 200 nmol/1 at 100 min after administration of 50 mg trimipramine and decreased gradually, whereas the values following the smaller dose were about half of those after the larger one. The results indicate that about 50 mg trimipramine is needed for obtaining a reduction of gastric secretions. Future studies may show whether 25 mg trimipramine, which does not suppress acid secretion when given perorally, is able to promote peptic ulcer healing.
A gas chromatographic-mass spectrometric (GC-MS) method has been developed, for the determination of trimipramine (TRI), desmethyltrimipramine (DTRI), didesmethyltrimipramine (DDTRI), 2-hydroxytrimipramine (2-OH-TRI) and 2-hydroxydesmethyltrimipramine (2-OH-DTRI). The method includes two derivatization steps with trifluoroacetic acid anhydride and N-methyl-N-(tert.-butyldimethyl silyl)trifluoroacetamide and the use of an SE-54 capillary silica column. The limits of quantitation were found to be 2 ng/ml for DTRI and 4 ng/ml for all other substances. Besides, methods have been optimized for the hydrolysis of the glucuronic acid conjugated metabolites. This specific detection method is useful, as polymedication is a usual practice in clinical situations, and its sensitivity allows its use for single-dose pharmacokinetic studies.
Sixty-nine outpatients with endoscopically confirmed duodenal and prepyloric (DU) or gastric ulcers (GU) completed a 4-week double-blind trial with either cimetidine, 1 g/day, or trimipramine, 50 mg/day. Ulcer healing was assessed by endoscopy at 4 weeks. At the end of the study 14 of 23 patients with DU treated with cimetidine and 13 of 25 treated with trimipramine had healed ulcers. In the patients with GU 7 of 11 ulcers (cimetidine) and 4 of 10 (trimipramine) healed. The differences in healing rates between the two treatment groups were not statistically significant, either in DU and GU groups separately or in the total material. The number of pain attacks per week decreased and the symptoms improved significantly in both treatment groups in DU, GU, and totally. Both drugs were well tolerated, but two patients in each treatment group developed a slight increase in serum transaminases. No serious side effects occurred. The study suggests trimipramine as an alternative drug to the well-established drug cimetidine in the treatment of duodenal and possibly also of gastric ulcer.
A method for the identification and quantitation of two tricyclic antidepressants, amoxapine (Asendin) and trimipramine (Surmontil) is presented here. Samples were extracted with hexane at pH 10, back-extracted with 1.0N sulfuric acid. The acidic layer was adjusted to pH 10 and re-extracted with hexane. Electron impact mass spectra were obtained. The base peak and molecular ion for amoxapine were at m/z 245 and 313, respectively. The base peak and molecular ion for trimipramine were at m/z 58 and 294, respectively. There were three forensic toxicology cases involving amoxapine in Cook County, IL, in 1980 and 1981. The concentrations of amoxapine in blood for these three cases were 1.66 mg/L, 7.16 mg/L, and 2.95 mg/L, respectively.
