This therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) grand round describes a patient with serious valproic acid intoxication. A total valproic acid level of 844 mg/L and an unbound valproic acid level of 604 mg/L were observed. Meropenem was administered to enhance the clearance of valproic acid. This off-label usage of meropenem is based on the drug-drug interaction between carbapenems and valproic acid, which reduced the level of valproic acid within 24 hours after administration.
BACKGROUND: Valproic acid (VPA) as a widely used primary medication in the treatment of epilepsy is associated with reversible or irreversible hepatotoxicity. Long-term VPA therapy is also related to increased risk for the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). In this review, metabolic elimination pathways of VPA in the liver and underlying mechanisms of VPA-induced hepatotoxicity are discussed. METHODS: We searched in PubMed for manuscripts published in English, combining terms such as "Valproic acid", "hepatotoxicity", "liver injury", and "mechanisms". The data of screened papers were analyzed and summarized. RESULTS: The formation of VPA reactive metabolites, inhibition of fatty acid beta-oxidation, excessive oxidative stress and genetic variants of some enzymes, such as CPS1, POLG, GSTs, SOD2, UGTs and CYPs genes, have been reported to be associated with VPA hepatotoxicity. Furthermore, carnitine supplementation and antioxidants administration proved to be positive treatment strategies for VPA-induced hepatotoxicity. CONCLUSION: Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) and routine liver biochemistry monitoring during VPA-therapy, as well as genotype screening for certain patients before VPA administration, could improve the safety profile of this antiepileptic drug.
Glioma is one of the most common intracranial tumors worldwide, and metastasis and chemoresistance remain a challenge in glioma treatment. This study aims to investigate the effect of sodium valproate on the invasion and metastasis of glioma cells and its mechanism. Glioma cell lines were stimulated with VPA at different concentrations and for different durations of action. U87 glioma cells were transfected with Smad4 plasmid and small interfering RNA, and the changes of EMT-related protein indexes in U87 cells after up- or downregulation of Smad4 were detected by Western blotting. Immunohistochemistry was used to detect the differences in the expression of Smad4, TIF1-gamma, and TGF-beta proteins in 39 glioma clinical specimens from the Department of Pathology of our hospital. Based on the regulation of EMT-related transcription factors by VPA, our study indicates that VPA inhibits the EMT process of glioma by altering the expression level of Smad4, which is induced by TGF-beta1 to form a Smad3/4 complex, thus inducing the EMT process of the tumor and acting as an antitumor target to inhibit the invasive ability of glioma cells. Sodium valproate inhibits glioma invasion and metastasis through the regulation of Smad4 expression.
The pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of valproic acid (VPA) were compared in six healthy volunteers after oral administration of the drug as follows: 1 g in standard tablet form, 1 g in enteric-coated tablet form, and 0.8 g in gelatin-capsule form. Following the administration of standard tablets, VPA concentrations reached a peak mean +/- SD of 105.4 +/- 9.0 micrograms/ml at 1 h and declined monoexponentially, with a terminal half-life of 14.9 +/- 2.4 h. Following the administration of the capsule, the serum concentration reached a peak of 82.1 +/- 14.8 micrograms/ml at 4 h. Following the administration of an enteric-coated tablet, there was an average time lag of 2 h with a delayed peak serum concentration of 93.5 +/- 13.1 micrograms/ml at 6 h. An identical terminal half-life of VPA was obtained for the three oral formulations. The bioavailability of the three VPA formulations was not significantly different, and it may be concluded that these formulations are bioequivalent.
Extractive electrospray ionization mass spectrometry is shown to allow real-time, in vivo drug monitoring and pharmacokinetic measurement in a non-invasive, pain-free manner as demonstrated by the mass spectral measurement of a novel exhaled breath biomarker for valproic acid, a medication used to control epilepsy.
BACKGROUND: Valproic acid and its sodium salt (sodium valproate) are antiepileptic drugs that are sometimes used to treat chronic neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia, although they are not licensed for this use. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the analgesic efficacy and adverse effects of valproic acid and sodium valproate in the management of chronic neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia. SEARCH STRATEGY: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of valproic acid and sodium valproate in acute, and chronic pain by searching MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane CENTRAL to June 2011, together with reference lists of retrieved papers and reviews. SELECTION CRITERIA: RCTs that were double blind and of eight-weeks duration or longer, reporting on analgesic effects and adverse events with valproic acid and sodium valproate in the treatment of chronic neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted results and scored for quality. We extracted efficacy and adverse event data, and examined issues of study quality. MAIN RESULTS: We included three studies, two in diabetic neuropathy (42 participants treated with valproate, 42 with placebo), and one in post-herpetic neuralgia (23 treated with divalproex sodium, 22 with placebo). Study duration was eight or 12 weeks. No studies were found in fibromyalgia.Only one study reported one of our primary outcomes (>/= 50% pain relief), while all three reported group means for pain reduction from baseline to endpoint. In all three studies; efficacy results were given only for participants who completed the study. One study in diabetic neuropathy and the study in post-herpetic neuralgia reported significant differences between active and placebo groups, but there were insufficient data for reliable pooled analysis.More adverse events were reported with active treatment than placebo, and included nausea, drowsiness and abnormal liver function tests. One participant taking sodium valproate withdrew due to serious derangement of liver enzymes. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: These three studies no more than hint that sodium valproate may reduce pain in diabetic neuropathy, and divalproex sodium in post-herpetic neuralgia, but the use of 'completer' analysis may overestimate efficacy, and there were too few data for pooled analysis of efficacy or harm, or to have confidence in the results of the individual studies. There is insufficient evidence to support the use of valproic acid or sodium valproate as a first-line treatment for neuropathic pain. There is more robust evidence of greater efficacy for a small number of other drugs.
BACKGROUND: Analgesics, sedatives, and antipsychotics are commonly prescribed for agitation and delirium in the intensive care unit (ICU), but their use is limited by adverse effects and lack of efficacy. Valproic acid is an alternative treatment option. OBJECTIVE: The primary objective of this study was to describe valproic acid prescribing in our institution's ICUs when used for agitation or delirium. Measures of effectiveness and safety were also assessed. METHODS: This was a single-center, retrospective, institutional review board-approved cohort study of adult inpatients admitted to the ICU between January 2018 and August 2018. Patients who received valproic acid for the treatment of agitation or delirium for >/=24 hours were included. Prescribing practices were evaluated for dose, frequency, and route of administration. Effectiveness was assessed via agitation and delirium assessment tools and quantity of adjunctive agents used. RESULTS: A total of 80 patients were included, with 35 receiving valproic acid alone and 45 in conjunction with antipsychotics. The most common valproic acid regimen was 250 mg orally 3 times daily. Delirium resolution occurred in 55% of patients: 24 in the valproic acid monotherapy group and 20 in the valproic acid plus antipsychotic group (69% vs 44%; P = 0.03). The incidence of delirium decreased from valproic acid day 0 to day 3 (93% vs 68%; P < 0.01), with no change in agitation (64% vs 63%; P = 0.28). CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: Valproic acid is frequently prescribed in agitated, delirious patients at our institution and may have a role in the management of ICU delirium.
Valproic acid (VPA) is a medication used to treat multiple neuroscience conditions. It is an inexpensive and useful medication, with a low incidence of adverse drug events. Nonetheless, optimal clinical outcomes require that a series of screening and laboratory steps be followed before the initiation of VPA therapy. An additional aspect of pharmacovigilance is to recognize clinical patterns signaling genetic traits that preclude VPA, background of the black box warnings, targeted assessments, and laboratory monitoring indicated while on VPA. The intention of this article is to provide a focused summary of published information clinically relevant to prescribing and monitoring these patients.
INTRODUCTION: Valproic acid is an effective first line drug for the treatment of epilepsy. Hepatotoxicity is a rare and potentially fatal adverse reaction for this medicine. OBJECTIVE: Firstly to characterise valproic acid reports on children with fatal outcome and secondly to determine reporting over time of hepatotoxicity with fatal outcome. METHODS: Individual case safety reports (ICSRs) for children </= 17 years with valproic acid and fatal outcome were retrieved from the WHO Global ICSR database, VigiBase, in June 2013. Reports were classified into hepatotoxic reactions or other reactions. Shrinkage observed-to-expected ratios were used to explore the relative reporting trend over time and for patient age. The frequency of polytherapy, i.e. reports with more than one antiepileptic medicine, was investigated. RESULTS: There have been 268 ICSRs with valproic acid and fatal outcome in children, reported from 25 countries since 1977. A total of 156 fatalities were reported with hepatotoxicity, which has been continuously and disproportionally reported over time. There were 31 fatalities with pancreatitis. Other frequently reported events were coma/encephalopathy, seizures, respiratory disorders and coagulopathy. Hepatotoxicity was disproportionally and most commonly reported in children aged 6 years and under (104/156 reports) but affected children of all ages. Polytherapy was significantly more frequently reported for valproic acid with fatal outcome (58%) compared with non-fatal outcome (34%). CONCLUSION: Hepatotoxicity remains a considerable problem. The risk appears to be greatest in young children (6 years and below) but can occur at any age. Polytherapy is commonly reported and seems to be a risk factor for hepatotoxicity, pancreatitis and other serious adverse drug reactions with valproic acid.
INTRODUCTION: Valproic acid is a versatile antiepileptic drug that is often used in the acute care setting. Intravenous valproic acid lends itself well to a continuous infusion as it exhibits a relatively short half-life. We evaluated the pharmacokinetics and clinical efficacy of continuous infusion valproic acid in hospitalized patients with migraine and seizures. METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed utilizing information from the medical records of patients receiving an intravenous continuous infusion of valproic acid. Patients were included if they were aged 1 month to 85 years and they received a continuous infusion of valproic acid. Therapeutic response, common adverse effects, and the pharmacokinetic profile of valproic acid were evaluated. RESULTS: Continuous infusion valproic acid led to a concentration within the desired range (50-100 mug/ml) in 83.4% of patients, a rate that was higher in pediatric patients. The clinical response rate was also higher in pediatric patients with seizures or migraines and appeared to be better when the concentration was >75 mug/ml. Analysis of safety parameters suggests similar safety considerations to valproic acid when administered via intermittent infusion. CONCLUSIONS: Continuous infusion valproic acid appears to be a safe, effective, and predictable manner by which to administer valproic acid to pediatric and adult patients admitted to the hospital.
Treatment of epileptic patients with valproic acid (VPA) may be associated with substantial weight changes that may increase morbidity and impair adherence to the treatment regimen. VPA-induced weight gain seems to be associated with many metabolic disturbances; the most frequent are hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance, hyperleptinemia and leptin resistance. Patients who gain weight during VPA therapy can develop dyslipidemia and metabolic syndrome that are associated with long-term vascular complications such as hypertension and atherosclerosis. Moreover, an elevation in the levels of uric acid and homocysteine, together with oxidative stress, may contribute to atherosclerotic risk in patients under long-term therapy with VPA. The aim of this review is to discuss the metabolic and endocrine effects of VPA chronic treatment in patients with epilepsy.
Valproic acid (VPA) was determined by EMIT assay in plasma, tears, saliva, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with epilepsy. Closer correlation was shown between tear/plasma and tear/CSF ratios than between saliva/plasma and saliva/CSF ratios. The VPA CSF/serum ratio was in good agreement with data in the literature. Salivary levels were extremely erratic, while those for tears were much more reliable. Determination of VPA in tears is therefore the best method of studying the VPA free fraction in those cases in which investigations of protein binding of the drug are necessary.
