Fifteen adults with refractory or recurrent Hodgkin's disease were treated with a combination of: vincristine, prednisolone, etoposide and chlorambucil (OPEC). All had previously received mustine, vinblastine, procarbazine and prednisolone (MVPP) and seven had subsequently been treated with alternative regimens. Responses were achieved in four, but complete remission in only one. Toxicity was considerable and five died of treatment related complications. Only two are alive (one in complete remission) more than three years after therapy. The toxicity of the OPEC regimen outweighed its benefit in this group of poor prognosis patients.
Three infusions of vincristine-loaded platelets were carried out in a young man with acute idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) refractory to steroids. This procedure, used until now only for chronic refractory ITP, insured a remission without side effects. After 2 years of follow-up the patient has not had relapse. A potentially dangerous splenectomy was thus avoided in a phase of the disease in which a spontaneous remission was still very probable.
Triazole and imidazole antifungal agents inhibit metabolism of vincristine, leading to excess vinca alkaloid exposure and severe neurotoxicity. Recent reports of debilitating interactions between vincristine and itraconazole, as well as posaconazole, voriconazole and ketoconazole underscore the need to improve medical awareness of this adverse combination. We, therefore, undertook a comprehensive analysis of reports of adverse drug interactions (ADIs) with the combination of vincristine and azole antifungal agents, established a new classification, and provided a detailed summary of these toxicities. In patients who had sufficient data for analysis, 47 individuals were identified who had an ADI with the combination of vincristine and antifungal azoles. Median age was 8 years (1.3-68 years) with 33(70%) having a diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Median time to ADI with vincristine was 9.5 days with itraconazole, 13.5 days posaconazole and 30 days voriconazole. The median number of vincristine doses preceding the ADI was 2 doses with itraconazole, 3 doses posaconazole and 2 doses voriconazole. The most common severe ADIs included gastrointestinal toxicity, peripheral neuropathy, hyponatremia/SIADH, autonomic neuropathy and seizures. Recovery from these ADIs occurred in 80.6% of patients. We recommend using alternative antifungal agents if possible in patients receiving vincristine to avoid this serious and potentially life-threatening drug interaction.
Vincristine (VCR) is a vital component in numerous treatment regimens for pediatric blood cancer. VCR-induced peripheral neuropathy (VIPN) represents a type of VCR toxicity influenced by multiple factors, including age, race, genetic traits, dosage, interactions, and administration regimen. However, the dose-response relationship of VIPN remains elusive. VCR is primarily metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3 A to generate the major metabolite M1. To date, there is a lack of literature documenting the pharmacokinetics (PK) characteristics of VCR and M1 in Chinese children within a 96 h timeframe. To address the gap, a developed LC-MS/MS method was successfully employed in the PK study of VCR and M1 in Chinese pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients. M1 was obtained through in vitro metabolism experiments, and mixed plasma samples of M1 and VCR were prepared. Plasma samples were pre-processed using the solid-phase extraction (SPE) technique. Samples were loaded into ProElut C18 Cartridges, washed with 5% methanol aqueous solution, and eluted with methanol. The eluent was concentrated and reconstituted for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. The standard calibration curves for VCR and M1 were 0.1-50 ng/mL and 0.05-5 ng/mL, respectively, with linear coefficients exceeding 0.99. Accuracy and precision of quality control (QC) samples fell within 115%. The analytical approach satisfied the quantitative demands for VCR and M1 in plasma samples within 96 h. VCR was metabolized to M1 at a relatively constant proportion (5.37%-18.06%) of VCR in vivo. No significant differences were observed in PK parameters of VCR in Chinese children compared to other countries and races. Further investigation is required to identify the key factors influencing VIPN in Chinese children.
Sustained release drug delivery systems remain a major clinical need for small molecule therapeutics in oncology. Here, mechanisms of small molecule interactions with silk protein films were studied with cationic oncology drugs, vincristine and doxorubicin, with a focus on hydrophobicity (non-ionic surfactant) and charge (pH and ionic strength). Interactions were primarily driven by charge interactions between the positively charged drugs and the negatively charged groups within the silk films. Exploiting chemical modifications of silk further modulated the drug interactions in a controlled fashion. Increasing anionic side groups via carboxylate- and sulfonate-modifications of tyrosine side chains in the silk protein using diazonium coupling chemistry, increased drug binding and altered drug release. The effects of silk film protein crystallinity, beta sheet content, on drug binding and release were also explored. Lower crystallinity supported more rapid drug binding when compared to higher crystalline silk films. The drug release kinetics were governed by the protonation state of vincristine and doxorubicin and were tunable based on silk crystallinity and chemistry. These studies depict an approach to characterize small molecule-silk protein interactions and methods to tune drug binding and release kinetics from this protein delivery matrix.
Prostate cancer is a prevalent carcinoma among males, and conventional treatment options are often limited. Cytotoxic chemotherapy, despite its drawbacks, remains a mainstay. We propose a targeted co-delivery approach using nanoscale delivery units for Oncolytic measles virus (OMV) and vincristine (VC) to enhance treatment efficacy. The HA-coated OMV + VC-loaded TCs nanoformulation is designed for targeted oncolytic activity in prostate cancer. The CD44 expression analysis in prostate cancer cell lines indicates a significantly high expression in PC3 cells. The optimization of nanoformulations using Design of Expert (DOE) is performed, and the preparation and characterization of HA-coated OMV + VC-loaded TCs nanoformulations are detailed showing average particle size 397.2 +/- 0.01 nm and polydispersity index 0.122 with zeta potential 19.7 + 0.01 mV. Results demonstrate successful encapsulation efficiency with 2.4 x 10(6) TCID50/Ml and sustained release of OMV and VC from the nanoformulation for up to 72 h. In vitro, assays reveal potent anticancer activity at 10 +/- 0.71% cell viability in PC3 cells compared to 73 +/- 0.66% in HPrEC and significant morphological changes at 90 microg/ml in dose and time-dependent manner. The co-formulation showed positive cell death 49.5 +/- 0.02% at 50 microg PI/ml in PBS and 54.3% cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase, 8.1% G0/G1 and 5.7% at S phase, with significant mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) at 50 microg/ml, as assessed by flow cytometry (FACS). The surface-integrating ligand approach enhances the targeted delivery of the oncolytic virus and chemotherapeutic drug, presenting a potential alternative for prostate cancer treatment and suggested that co-administering VC and OMV in a nanoformulation could improve therapeutic outcomes while reducing chemotherapeutic drug doses.
Vincristine-induced peripheral neuropathy (VIPN) is a prevalent and painful complication in cancer patients that lacks effective treatments. In this issue of JEM, Starobova et al. (2021. J. Exp. Med.https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20201452) report that VIPN is driven by innate immune system activation, a discovery that unlocks immunotherapies as potential treatments.
BACKGROUND: Combination therapy is a key strategy for minimizing drug resistance, a common problem in cancer therapy. The microtubule-depolymerizing agent vincristine is widely used in the treatment of acute leukemia. In order to decrease toxicity and chemoresistance of vincristine, this study will investigate the effects of combination vincristine and vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA)), a pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor, on human acute T cell lymphoblastic leukemia cells. METHODS: Cell viability experiments were determined by 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, and cell cycle distributions as well as mitochondria membrane potential were analyzed by flow cytometry. In vitro tubulin polymerization assay was used to test tubulin assembly, and immunofluorescence analysis was performed to detect microtubule distribution and morphology. In vivo effect of the combination was evaluated by a MOLT-4 xenograft model. Statistical analysis was assessed by Bonferroni's t test. RESULTS: Cell viability showed that the combination of vincristine and SAHA exhibited greater cytotoxicity with an IC50 value of 0.88 nM, compared to each drug alone, 3.3 and 840 nM. This combination synergically induced G2/M arrest, followed by an increase in cell number at the sub-G1 phase and caspase activation. Moreover, the results of vincristine combined with an HDAC6 inhibitor (tubastatin A), which acetylated alpha-tubulin, were consistent with the effects of vincristine/SAHA co-treatment, thus suggesting that SAHA may alter microtubule dynamics through HDAC6 inhibition. CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that the combination of vincristine and SAHA on T cell leukemic cells resulted in a change in microtubule dynamics contributing to M phase arrest followed by induction of the apoptotic pathway. These data suggest that the combination effect of vincristine/SAHA could have an important preclinical basis for future clinical trial testing.
Underlying mechanism of nanostructures upon monoterpene induction in Catharanthus roseus has not been explored yet. In the current study, Copper, Iron and Zinc nanoparticles were biosynthesized by Eriobotrya japonica seed extract and capped with reduced glutathione. Biosynthesized nanoparticles and their capped analogues were characterized by UV-visible spectrophotometer, FTIR, XRD and SEM. Selected concentration of nanostructures were used in plant tissue culture media which instigated the production of alkaloids, tannins and flavonoids without significantly affecting the growth index of propagated calli and shoots cultures of C. roseus. Accelerated vincristine production was noticed in propagated calli and shoots under copper and zinc nanostress (1645-1865 mug/ml respectively) with the least effect by iron nanostructure. Highest concentration of calcium was recorded in in vitro shoots under capped (3.42 mg/ml +/- 7.16) and uncapped (4.41 mg/ml +/- 20.44) Zn nanoparticles compared to control (2.82 mg/ml +/- 13.41). Real time PCR depicts nano-zinc mediated increased expression of DAT and PRX1 genes of TIA pathway. Significant correlation among PRX1/DAT gene expression with vincristine production and calcium accumulation in the presence of nanostress validate by PCA. This study paved way the opportunities of metal biogenic nanomaterials as an ideal drug modulator in plant tissue culture studies.
BACKGROUND: Vincristine (VCR) is a critical part of treatment in pediatric malignancies and is associated with dose-dependent peripheral neuropathy (vincristine-induced peripheral neuropathy [VIPN]). Our previous findings show VCR metabolism is regulated by the CYP3A5 gene. Individuals who are low CYP3A5 expressers metabolize VCR slower and experience more severe VIPN as compared to high expressers. Preliminary observations suggest that Caucasians experience more severe VIPN as compared to nonCaucasians. PROCEDURE: Kenyan children with cancer who were undergoing treatment including VCR were recruited for a prospective cohort study. Patients received IV VCR 2 mg/m(2) /dose with a maximum dose of 2.5 mg as part of standard treatment protocols. VCR pharmacokinetics (PK) sampling was collected via dried blood spot cards and genotyping was conducted for common functional variants in CYP3A5, multi-drug resistance 1 (MDR1), and microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT). VIPN was assessed using five neuropathy tools. RESULTS: The majority of subjects (91%) were CYP3A5 high-expresser genotype. CYP3A5 low-expresser genotype subjects had a significantly higher dose and body surface area normalized area under the curve than CYP3A5 high-expresser genotype subjects (0.28 +/- 0.15 hr.m(2) /l vs. 0.15 +/- 0.011 hr.m(2) /l, P = 0.027). Regardless of which assessment tool was utilized, minimal neuropathy was detected in this cohort. There was no difference in the presence or severity of neuropathy assessed between CYP3A5 high- and low-expresser genotype groups. CONCLUSION: Genetic factors are associated with VCR PK. Due to the minimal neuropathy observed in this cohort, there was no demonstrable association between genetic factors or VCR PK with development of VIPN. Further studies are needed to determine the role of genetic factors in optimizing dosing of VCR for maximal benefit.
