The nuclear farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and the enzyme soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) are validated molecular targets to treat metabolic disorders such as non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Their simultaneous modulation in vivo has demonstrated a triad of anti-NASH effects and thus may generate synergistic efficacy. Here we report dual FXR activators/sEH inhibitors derived from the anti-asthma drug Zafirlukast. Systematic structural optimization of the scaffold has produced favorable dual potency on FXR and sEH while depleting the original cysteinyl leukotriene receptor antagonism of the lead drug. The resulting polypharmacological activity profile holds promise in the treatment of liver-related metabolic diseases.
Zafirlukast is a competitive and selective leukotriene receptor antagonist indicated for the prophylaxis and treatment of chronic asthma. The rationale for the development of leukotriene antagonists was based on in vitro and in vivo data demonstrating the extensive role of the cysteinyl leukotrienes C4 (LTC4), D4 (LTD4) and E4 (LTE4) in the pathogenesis of asthma. Initial data have demonstrated an improvement in pulmonary function and symptom control and a reduction in the use of short-acting inhaled beta 2-adrenoceptor agonist therapy in patients with mild to moderate asthma treated with oral zafirlukast at the recommended dosage of 20 mg twice daily. Available data also suggest that zafirlukast may significantly reduce the incidence of asthma exacerbations. Data on the comparative efficacy of zafirlukast and existing antiasthma medications are limited. Results from 2 double-blind randomised studies comparing zafirlukast 20 mg twice daily with sodium cromoglycate aerosol or dry powder inhalation reported similar efficacy for both drugs. In a comparison with inhaled beclomethasone dipropionate (0.2 to 0.25 mg twice daily), improvements in morning peak expiratory flow rate, forced expiratory volume in 1 second and daytime symptom score were significantly less with zafirlukast 20 mg twice daily for 6 weeks. However, available data suggest that patient compliance and patient preference may be greater with oral zafirlukast 20 mg twice daily than with twice-daily inhaled corticosteroid therapy. Confounding results from 2 studies preclude any clear conclusions regarding the potential steroid-sparing effect of zafirlukast at the recommended dosage of 20 mg twice daily. Furthermore, Churg-Strauss syndrome has been reported in 6 patients who were being withdrawn from oral corticosteroid therapy while receiving treatment with oral zafirlukast. It is, therefore, recommended that zafirlukast-treated patients who require a reduction in their oral corticosteroid therapy are closely monitored. Zafirlukast is generally well tolerated. Reports of elevated liver enzymes in patients receiving high dosages of zafirlukast (80 mg twice daily) preclude the use of dosages exceeding 40 mg twice daily. Careful monitoring is necessary in zafirlukast-treated patients receiving concomitant therapy with drugs such as warfarin, terfenadine and erythromycin because of the potential for drug interactions. Thus, zafirlukast is a potentially useful addition to current antiasthma therapies in patients with mild to moderate asthma. Because zafirlukast is administered orally, it may be particularly beneficial in patients poorly compliant with asthma therapy as a result of poor inhaler technique. Further investigation of the efficacy of zafirlukast is expected to more clearly define its position in the management of asthma.
Mutations in the Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene are the driving force in many forms of clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) and promote hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-dependent tumor proliferation, metastasis and angiogenesis. Despite the progress that has already been made, ccRCC generally remain resistant to conventional therapies and ccRCC patients suffer from metastasis and acquired resistance, highlighting the need for novel therapeutic options. Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (CysLTR1) antagonists, like zafirlukast, are administered in bronchial asthma to control eicosanoid signaling. Intriguingly, long-term use of zafirlukast decreases cancer risk and leukotriene receptor antagonists inhibit tumor growth, but the mechanisms still remain unexplored. Therefore, we aim to understand the mechanisms of zafirlukast-mediated cell death in ccRCC cells. We show that zafirlukast induces VHL-dependent and TNFalpha-independent non-apoptotic and non-necroptotic cell death in ccRCC cells. Cell death triggered by zafirlukast could be rescued with antioxidants and the PARP-1 inhibitor Olaparib, and additionally relies on HIF-2alpha. Finally, MG-132-mediated proteasome inhibition sensitized VHL wild-type cells to zafirlukast-induced cell death and inhibition of HIF-2alpha rescued zafirlukast- and MG-132-triggered cell death. Together, these results highlight the importance of VHL, HIF and proteasomal degradation in zafirlukast-induced oxidative cell death with potentially novel therapeutic implications for ccRCC.
Lung diseases, including asthma, pose a serious global health issue. Loss of mitochondrial function and decreased mitochondrial biogenesis play pivotal roles in the initiation and progression of chronic lung diseases. Thus, maintaining mitochondrial function and homeostasis is an important treatment goal. Zafirlukast is a CysLTR1 antagonist that is widely used as an adjuvant treatment for asthma. In the present study, we investigated the effects of zafirlukast in vitro using human bronchial epithelial cells (BECs). We performed measurements of oxygen consumption and bioenergetics and found that zafirlukast increased mitochondrial respiration and biogenesis in human BECs as evidenced by increased mitochondrial mass and mtDNA/nDNA. Through real-time PCR and western blot analysis, we found that zafirlukast significantly increased the expression of PGC-1alpha, NRF1, and TFAM at both the mRNA and protein levels. Finally, we determined that these effects are mediated through CREB signaling and that inhibition of CREB with its specific inhibitor H89 abolished the effects of zafirlukast described above. Thus, zafirlukast might have potential in enhancing mitochondrial function by promoting mitochondrial biogenesis in human bronchial epithelial cells through upregulating the expression of PGC-1alpha and activating the CREB pathway.
The two most clinically important members of the flavivirus genus, Zika virus (ZIKV) and dengue virus (DENV) pose a significant public health challenge. They cause a range of diseases in humans, from hemorrhagic to neurological manifestations, leading to economic and social burden worldwide. Nevertheless, there are no approved antiviral drugs to treat these infections. Zafirlukast is an orally available Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved drug for the prophylaxis and treatment of chronic asthma. It is a leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA) with high selectivity of the cysteinyl leukotriene-1 receptor (CYSLTR1) that acts as an immune modulator. Thus, we evaluated the antiviral potential of Zafirlukast against ZIKV and DENV in SK-N-SH cells. We showed that Zafirlukast exhibited potent antiviral activity against ZIKV, which could be linked to Zafirlukast's immune blockade of TNF signaling pathways and its downstream signaling pathways such as MAPK and ERK1/2. In addition, our results showed that Zafirlukast also counteracts ZIKV-induced changes in key genes involved in cellular lipid metabolism. Thus, these findings highlight the translational potential of optimizing Zafirlukast as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of ZIKV and DENV.
Poor water solubility is a bottle neck in the development of many new drug candidates, and understanding and circumventing this is essential for a more effective drug development. Zafirlukast (ZA) is a leukotriene antagonist marketed for the treatment of asthma (Accolate(R)). ZA is poorly water soluble, and is formulated in an amorphous form (aZA) to improve its solubility and oral bioavailability. It has been shown that upon dissolution of aZa, the concentration of ZA in solution is supersaturated with respect to its stable crystalline form (ZA monohydrate), and thus, in theory, the bioavailability increases upon amorphization of ZA. The polymers hydroxypropylmethylcellulose (HPMC) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), often used as stabilizers of the supersaturated state, are in the excipient list of Accolate(R). It is not recommended to take Accolate(R) with food, as this reduces the bioavailability by 40%. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of simulated fasted and fed state intestinal media as well as the effect of HPMC and PVP on the supersaturation and precipitation of ZA in vitro. Supersaturation of aZA was studied in vitro in a small scale setup using the muDiss Profiler. Several media were used for this study: One medium simulating the fasted state intestinal fluids and three media simulating different fed state intestinal fluids. Solid state changes of the drug were investigated by small angle x-ray scattering. The duration wherein aZA was maintained at a supersaturated state was prolonged in the presence of HPMC and lasted more than 20h in the presence of PVP in a fasted state intestinal medium. The presence of PVP increased the concentration of drug dissolved in the supersaturated state. The duration of supersaturation was shorter in fed than in a fasted state simulated intestinal media, but the concentration during supersaturation was higher. It was thus not possible to predict any positive or negative food effects from the dissolution/precipitation curves from different media. Lipolysis products in the fed state simulated media seemed to cause both a negative effect on the duration of supersaturation, and an increased drug concentration during supersaturation. In contrast, when testing the effect of a fed state simulated medium compared to the fasted state medium, in the presence of PVP, a clear negative effect was seen on the dissolution/precipitation curved of the fed state medium. The drug concentration during supersaturation was marginally different in the two media, but a precipitation of ZA was seen in the fed state medium, which was not observed in the fasted state medium. Solid state transformation from aZA to ZA monohydrate (mhZA) upon precipitation of the supersaturated solutions was confirmed by small angle x-ray scattering. All of these results can explain the described in vivo behavior of ZA. For ZA simple dissolution experiments in vitro can be used to examine supersaturation, effectiveness of PI and potential food effects on these.
