PURPOSE: To identify and analyze postmarketing cases of complex sleep behaviors (CSBs) resulting in serious injuries, including death, associated with eszopiclone, zaleplon, or zolpidem (Z-drugs). METHODS: Retrospective analysis of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) from 16 December 1992 through 27 February 2018 and medical literature using PubMed and EMBASE. We used random sampling and descriptive statistics. RESULTS: We identified 66 cases that met inclusion and exclusion criteria, four of which were identified in the medical literature. Twenty cases reported death and 46 cases reported serious injuries in association with CSBs occurring after the use of a Z-drug. Fatal cases described events, such as carbon monoxide poisoning, drowning, falls, hypothermia, motor vehicle collisions, and apparent completed suicide. Nonfatal cases resulting in serious injuries described events, such as accidental overdoses, falls, gunshot wounds, hypothermia, third-degree burns, and self-injuries or suicide attempts. Twenty-two cases reported a previous episode of a CSB while taking a Z-drug prior to the event reported in this case series. CONCLUSIONS: The FAERS and medical literature cases support the need for increased awareness of the consequences that may occur because of CSBs associated with the use of Z-drugs. Therefore, to protect public health, regulatory actions were taken, including adding a Boxed Warning, a Contraindication in patients who have experienced a prior episode of a CSB with a Z-drug, and updating the existing Warnings and Precautions. An FDA Drug Safety Communication was also disseminated to alert healthcare professionals and the public of this potential risk.
Benzodiazepines have historically been the mainstay of treatment for sleeping disorders, yet they have many shortcomings. A new group of sedative hypnotic agents has been developed for this purpose. Similar to the benzodiazepines, zaleplon, zolpidem and zopiclone have activity at the GABA receptor complex, yet they appear to have more selectivity for certain subunits of the GABA receptor. This produces a clinical profile that is more efficacious with fewer side effects. Zaleplon, zolpidem and zopiclone are structurally distinct. Due to variation in binding to the GABA receptor subunits, these three compounds show subtle differences in their effect on sleep stages, and as antiepileptics, anxiolytics and amnestics. The duration of action of zaleplon, zolpidem and zopiclone can be related to their individual pharmacokinetic profile, which subsequently determines the time course of drug effect. Each of these compounds has a unique pharmacokinetic profile with different bioavailability, volume of distribution and elimination half-lives. Zaleplon has a rapid elimination so there are fewer residual side effects after taking a single dose at bedtime. By comparison, zolpidem and zopiclone have a more delayed elimination so there may be a prolonged drug effect. This can result in residual sedation and side effects but may be useful for sustained treatment of insomnia with less waking during the night. There are also differences in potency based on plasma concentrations suggesting that there are differences in binding to the GABA receptor complex. Although zaleplon has a much lower bioavailability (30%), the treatment dose is similar to zolpidem and zopiclone (bioavilaibility of 70%) because of the increased potency of zaleplon. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of zaleplon, zolpidem and zopiclone are significantly different from benzodiazepines. The new drugs are sufficiently unique from each other to allow customisation of treatment for various types of insomnia. While zaleplon may be best indicated for the delayed onset of sleep, zolpidem and zopiclone may be better indicated for maintaining a complete night's sleep. Only the patient's symptoms and response to treatment will dictate the best course of treatment.
The "z-drugs" zopiclone, zolpidem, eszopiclone, and zaleplon were introduced in the 1980s for the treatment of insomnia, as it was observed that the side effect profile associated with these medications were more benign than those related to the benzodiazepines. This meta-analysis set out to ascertain which domains of cognitive function, if any, were affected by the ingestion of these medications. A total of 20 studies met the study inclusion criteria. Results revealed medium effect sizes for zopiclone and zolpidem on measures of verbal memory. An additional medium effect size was observed for zolpidem on attention. Finally, smaller effect sizes were observed for zolpidem speed of processing and for zopiclone on working memory. It is clear from these data that the use of a single dose of the z-drugs in healthy adults as measured in the morning following the exposure does produce a specific rather than a generalized negative effect on cognitive function. However, there were only enough studies to evaluate the individual cognitive effects of the zolpidem and zopiclone medications; the specific effects of zaleplon and eszopiclone cannot be ascertained because only one study met the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the review.
STUDY OBJECTIVES: Recent meta-analyses raising concern about risks of hypnotics suggest a need for more clarification of these risks. METHODS: Because of preliminary suggestions that eszopiclone causes infections, we studied US Food and Drug Administration files on the 4 most-recently approved hypnotics, combined with published studies, to compile the risk ratios of infections for groups randomly assigned to receive hypnotics versus those assigned to receive placebos in controlled trials. Parallel controlled clinical trials of eszopiclone, ramelteon, zaleplon, and zolpidem were included when data on subjects, duration of exposure, and adverse effects were available. Results of trials were combined by meta-analyses. RESULTS: Of 8828 participants assigned to the 4 hypnotics and 4383 participants who randomly received placebos, 606 in the hypnotics groups and 200 in the placebo groups were reported to develop some kind of infection (risk ratio = 1.44, 95% confidence interval 1.25-1.64, p < 0.00001). Most infections were apparently mild and did not lead to dropouts. Subanalyses for individual drugs indicated that eszopiclone and zolpidem individually were associated with reported infections. There were insufficient data concerning individual studies of zaleplon and ramelteon for valid secondary meta-analyses of zaleplon or ramelteon by themselves. CONCLUSIONS: Research is needed to objectively determine whether the use of hypnotics increases the risk of infections. Immune compromise or esophageal reflux and aspiration should be studied as possible mechanisms.
3-Aminopyrazoles required for the synthesis of pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidines were obtained by the reaction of enaminonitriles with hydrazine hydrate. The resulting aminopyrazoles are reacted with formylated acetophenones under reflux at [Formula: see text] assisted by KHSO[Formula: see text] in aqueous media to form regioselectively 3,7-diarylpyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidines and 3,6-diarylpyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidine-7-amines. X-ray crystallography of selected compounds 5b and 7i further confirmed the regioselective formation of these products.
Zaleplon, a pyrazolopyrimidine that is under development as a hypnotic, produces its pharmacological effects at the benzodiazepine-recognition site on the GABA(A) benzodiazepine-receptor complex. Unlike most benzodiazepines, zaleplon binds selectively to the BZ1 (omega1) subtype of the benzodiazepine receptor. The present study compared the acute subject-rated effects, performance-impairing effects, and abuse potential of zaleplon and triazolam, a triazolobenzodiazepine hypnotic, in 14 healthy volunteers with histories of drug abuse. Zaleplon (25, 50, and 75 mg), triazolam (0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 mg) and placebo were administered orally in this double-blind, crossover study. Zaleplon and triazolam produced comparable dose-related effects on several subject-rated drug-effect questionnaires. Zaleplon and triazolam also produced comparable dose-dependent decrements on several performance tasks including balance, circular lights, digit-enter and recall, DSST, picture recall/recognition and repeated acquisition. Same-day and next-day subject-rated measures reflecting abuse potential (e.g., drug liking, good effects, and monetary street value) also suggest that zaleplon and triazolam were comparable. The only notable between-drug difference observed in the present study was that the time-action function of zaleplon differed from that of triazolam. The onset time, time to maximum drug effect, and duration of action were shorter with zaleplon than triazolam. Thus, despite its non-benzodiazepine structure and unique benzodiazepine-receptor binding profile, the behavioral pharmacological profile of zaleplon is similar to that of triazolam.
STUDY OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of zaleplon 10 mg and zolpidem 10 mg administered during experimental middle-of-the-night awakenings in patients with sleep-maintenance insomnia using objective polysomnographic measures and to assess daytime residual sedation 4 to 7 hours after dosing using sleep-latency testing. DESIGN: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 3-period, crossover design was used to study 37 adults with insomnia who received treatment during an experimental awakening 4 hours after bedtime. Latency to persistent sleep and total sleep time before and after awakening were recorded. The primary residual sedation measure was a sleep latency test conducted hourly from 4 to 7 hours after treatment. Self-report measure of alertness and concentration and digit symbol substitution tests were examined concurrently. SETTING: Sleep disorders centers. PATIENTS: Thirty-seven adults with sleep-maintenance insomnia. INTERVENTIONS: Zaleplon 10 mg, zolpidem 10 mg, or placebo. MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Thirty-one patients had efficacy-evaluable data; 37 patients received at least 1 dose of study medication and were included in the safety analysis. Compared with placebo, latency to persistent sleep after both zaleplon and zolpidem was shorter and total sleep time after administration of the drugs was longer (overall p < .001, Dunnett p < .001 for all posthoc comparisons). Significant differences from placebo were not found with zaleplon in daytime-sedation measures. At 4, 5, and 7 hours after zolpidem, sleep onset on sleep latency testing was shorter than after placebo (overall p < .001 for all, Dunnett tests for posthoc comparisons p < .001, p < .001, p < .05, respectively). Self-report measures of concentration (4, 5, and 6 hours, overall p < .05, Dunnett p < .05 for each time point) and alertness (4 hours, overall p < .05, Dunnett p < .05), and Digit Symbol Substitution Test scores (4 and 5 hours, overall p < .001, Dunnett p < .01 for both time points) after zolpidem were also lower than with placebo. CONCLUSIONS: Zaleplon 10 mg and zolpidem 10 mg effectively shorten sleep latency and lengthen sleep duration after dosing, when administered during experimental nocturnal awakening. Residual sedation was not detected as little as 4 hours after zaleplon 10 mg, whereas residual sedation was detected with zolpidem 10 mg up to 7 hours after treatment. These findings suggest that zaleplon may be an appropriate treatment for use when patients awaken during the night and have difficulty reinitiating sleep.
Twenty-four healthy male and female subjects, who participated in this randomized, double-blind, crossover study, received single nighttime doses of zaleplon 10 mg (therapeutic dose), zaleplon 20 mg, zolpidem 10 mg (therapeutic dose), zolpidem 20 mg, triazolam 0.25 mg (positive control), and placebo. Subjective behavioral ratings and psychomotor tests were completed before and 1.25 and 8.25 hours after administration of the study drug. The Immediate and Delayed Word Recall tests and the Digit Span Test were used to assess memory. The Digit-Symbol Substitution Test, Paired Associates Learning Test, and Divided Attention Test were used to assess other cognitive skills. Zaleplon 10 mg did not produce any significant changes in memory or learning compared with placebo. All other active treatments, including zolpidem 10 mg, caused psychomotor impairment at the 1.25-hour test battery. Zolpidem 20 mg (twice the therapeutic dose) produced more psychomotor impairment at the 1.25-hour assessment than did any of the other active treatments, including zaleplon 20 mg. At the 8.25-hour time point, test scores for subjects who received zaleplon 10 mg and 20 mg did not differ from the test scores for those who received placebo. However, cognitive impairment persisted up to the 8.25-hour observation for subjects who were administered triazolam 0.25 mg and zolpidem 20 mg. Adverse events associated with the use of zaleplon were transient and mild-to-moderate in severity. Overall, this study shows that zaleplon is a safe hypnotic that does not affect memory, learning, or psychomotor skills associated with vigilance.
Insufficient daytime sleep may result in reduction of effectiveness and safety during overnight military missions. The usefulness of temazepam and zaleplon to optimize afternoon sleep and their effects on performance and alertness during a subsequent night shift were studied. METHOD: In a randomized double-blind within-subjects design, 11 subjects took 20 mg of temazepam, 10 mg of zaleplon, or placebo before a 5:30-10:00 p.m. sleep period. Sleep length and quality were measured. Subjects were kept awake throughout the night while alertness, cognitive performance, and muscle power were repeatedly measured. RESULTS: Temazepam provided significantly longer and qualitatively better sleep than zaleplon or placebo. During the night, sleepiness increased and muscle power was impaired in all conditions. Better sleep was correlated with less sleepiness during the night. CONCLUSION: Temazepam is useful to optimize a 4.5-hour afternoon sleep before overnight missions. Irrespective of hypnotic treatment, sleepiness and fatigue increased during the night shift.
PURPOSE: This study evaluated the relationship of dose, plasma concentration, and time to the pharmacodynamics of zaleplon and zolpidem, 2 structurally distinct benzodiazepine receptor agonists. METHOD: Ten healthy male volunteers received single oral doses of placebo, 10 mg zaleplon, 20 mg zaleplon, 10 mg zolpidem, and 20 mg zolpidem in a double-blind, 5-condition crossover study, with 48 hours elapsing between trials. Plasma drug concentrations and pharmacodynamic effects were measured during the 8 to 24 hours after administration. RESULTS: Kinetics of zaleplon and zolpidem were not significantly related to dose. However, zaleplon had more rapid elimination (apparent elimination half-life [t1/2] of 1 hour) and higher apparent oral clearance (approximately 4300 mL/min) than zolpidem (t1/2, 2.0 to 2.2 hours; apparent oral clearance, 340 to 380 mL/min). Active treatments produced pharmacodynamic effects consistent with benzodiazepine agonist activity: self- and observer-rated sedation, impairment of digit symbol substitution test (DSST) performance, impaired memory, and increased electroencephalographic activity in the beta frequency range. The overall order of agonist potency was as follows: placebo < 10 mg zaleplon < 20 mg zaleplon < 10 mg zolpidem < 20 mg zolpidem; on a number of measures, 20 mg zaleplon was comparable to 10 mg zolpidem. Quantitative effects of zolpidem 20 mg far exceeded those of other treatments. Dynamic effects of both drugs were significantly related to plasma concentration. CONCLUSIONS: Benzodiazepine agonist effects of zaleplon and zolpidem were dose and concentration dependent. At the usual clinically effective hypnotic dose (10 mg of either drug), agonist effects of zolpidem exceeded those of zaleplon.
OBJECTIVE: This study compared the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) profile of zaleplon, a new pyrazolopyrimidine hypnotic, with those of zolpidem and placebo. METHODS: This was a double-blind, 5-period crossover study in which healthy volunteers with no history of sleeping disorder were randomized to 10- or 20-mg oral doses of zaleplon, 10- or 20-mg oral doses of zolpidem, or placebo. The pharmacokinetic characteristics of the active drugs were estimated using a noncompartmental method and NONMEM. Pharmacodynamic characteristics were determined using psychophysical tests, including measures of sedation, mood, mental and motor speed, and recent and remote recall. Results of these tests were used to compare the drugs' relative PK/PD profiles. RESULTS: Ten healthy male and female volunteers, aged 23 to 31 years, took part in the study. The apparent elimination half-life of zaleplon (60.1+/-8.9 min) was significantly shorter than that of zolpidem (124.5+/-37.9 min) (P < 0.001). Zaleplon produced less sedation than zolpidem at the 2 doses studied (P < 0.001). The sedation scores of the zaleplon groups returned to baseline in less time than those of the zolpidem groups (4 vs 8 hours; P < 0.05). Zaleplon had no effect on recent or remote recall, whereas zolpidem had a significant effect on both measures (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: In this study in 10 young, healthy volunteers, zaleplon was eliminated more rapidly, produced no memory loss, and caused less sedation than zolpidem at the same doses.
The aim of this work was to investigate the potential synergistic effect of water-soluble polymers (hypromellose, HPMC and polyvinylpyrrolidone, PVP) on zaleplon (ZAL) complexation with parent beta-cyclodextrin (betaCD) and its randomly methylated derivative (RAMEB) in solution and in solid state. The addition of HPMC to the complexation medium improved ZAL complexation and solubilization with RAMEB (K(ZAL/RAMEB)=156+/-5M(-1) and K(ZAL/RAMEB/HPMC)=189+/-8M(-1); p<0.01), while such effect was not observed for betaCD (K(ZAL/betaCD)=112+/-2M(-1) and K(ZAL/betaCD/HPMC)=119+/-8M(-1); p>0.05). Although PVP increased the ZAL aqueous solubility from 0.22 to 0.27mg/mL, it did not show any synergistic effects on ZAL solubilization with the cyclodextrins tested. Binary and ternary systems of ZAL with betaCD, RAMEB and HPMC were prepared by spray-drying. Differential scanning calorimetry, X-ray powder diffraction and scanning electron microscopy demonstrated a partial ZAL amorphization in spray-dried binary and ternary systems with betaCD, while the drug was completely amorphous in all samples with RAMEB. Furthermore, inclusion complex formation in all systems prepared was confirmed by solid-state NMR spectroscopy. The in vitro dissolution rate followed the rank order ZAL/RAMEB/HPMC>ZAL/RAMEB=ZAL/betaCD/HPMC>ZAL/betaCD>>ZAL, clearly demonstrating the superior performance of RAMEB on ZAL complexation in the solid state and its synergistic effect with HPMC on drug solubility. Surprisingly, when loaded into tablets made with insoluble microcrystalline cellulose, RAMEB complexes had no positive effect on drug dissolution, because HPMC and RAMEB acted as a binders inside the tablets, prolonging their disintegration. Oppositely, the formulation with mannitol, a soluble excipient, containing a ternary RAMEB system, released the complete drug-dose in only 5min, clearly demonstrating its suitability for the development of immediate-release oral formulation of ZAL.
Gefitinib and erlotinib are epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) with activity against metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. Aldehyde oxidase-1 (AOX1) is a cytosolic drug-metabolizing enzyme. We conducted an experimental and molecular docking study on the effect of gefitinib, erlotinib, and select metabolites on the in vitro catalytic activity of AOX1, as assessed by carbazeran 4-oxidation, and determined the impact of AOX1 inhibition on hepatic metabolism of zaleplon and methotrexate. Gefitinib, desmorpholinopropylgefitinib, erlotinib, desmethylerlotinib, and didesmethylerlotinib inhibited human hepatic cytosolic carbazeran 4-oxidation by a competitive mode, with inhibition constants in submicromolar or low micromolar concentrations. Desmethylgefitinib did not affect AOX1 catalytic activity. A similar pattern was obtained when investigated with human kidney cytosol or recombinant AOX1. The differential effect of gefitinib on human, rat, and mouse hepatic AOX1 catalytic activity suggests species-dependent chemical inhibition of AOX1. Erlotinib was considerably more potent than gefitinib in decreasing hepatic cytosolic zaleplon 5-oxidation and methotrexate 7-oxidation. Molecular docking analyses provided structural insights into the interaction between EGFR-TKIs and AOX1, with key residues and bonds identified, which provided favorable comparison and ranking of potential inhibitors. Based on the US Food and Drug Administration guidance to assess the risk of drug-drug interactions, the calculated R(1) values indicate that further investigations are warranted to determine whether gefitinib and erlotinib impact AOX1-mediated drug metabolism in vivo. Overall, erlotinib desmethylerlotinib, didesmethylerlotinib, gefitinib, and desmorpholinopropylgefitinib are potent inhibitors of human AOX1 catalytic function and hepatic metabolism of zaleplon and methotrexate, potentially affecting drug efficacy or toxicity. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: As epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), gefitinib and erlotinib are first-line pharmacotherapy for metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. Our experimental findings indicate that clinically relevant concentrations of gefitinib, desmorpholinopropylgefitinib, erlotinib, desmethylerlotinib, and didesmethylerlotinib, but not desmethylgefitinib, inhibit human aldehyde oxidase (AOX1) catalytic activity and hepatic cytosolic metabolism of zaleplon and methotrexate. Molecular docking analysis provide structural insights into the key AOX1 interactions with these EGFR-TKIs. Our findings may trigger improved strategies for new EGFR-TKI design and development.
PURPOSE: To estimate the degree of long-term use of zopiclone, zolpidem and zaleplon among Danes aged 65 and older and the association with sociodemographic factors and use of other drugs. METHODS: Danish register-based study of 5000 men and 5000 women aged 65 or older on 1 January 2004. Information on sociodemographic factors and drug redemptions were collected for 2003, with follow-up of zopiclone, zolpidem and zaleplon redemptions in 2004. Long-term use was defined as redemptions corresponding to a continuous daily use for more than 4 weeks (based on (1/2) DDD). The association between long-term use and sociodemographics and drug use was estimated by logistic regression. RESULTS: Ten per cent of all men and 16% of all women had a long-term use for minimum 4 weeks corresponding to 94% of the male and 93% of the female users. Four per cent of the men and 6% of the women had redeemed more than (1/2) DDD per day in 2004. Long-term use was associated with: Being a woman, high age, widowed or divorced, high education and high gross income. Long-term use was also associated with use of other drugs, the association with ATC group N being the strongest. Restricting the analyses to individuals who had minimum one zopiclone, zolpidem or zaleplon redemption gave similar results. CONCLUSION: The results indicate that the guidance for length of use is not followed. Long-term use of zopiclone, zolpidem and zaleplon is associated with sociodemographic factors and use of other drugs, particularly from ATC group N.
The effects of zolpidem or zaleplon on sleep architecture, respiratory patterns and performance were assessed at a simulated altitude of 4,000 m. Twelve male healthy subjects spent 4 nights in a decompression chamber, 1 at sea level (baseline), 3 at 4,000 m to test zolpidem (10 mg), zaleplon (10 mg) and placebo, given 15 min before switching the lights off. Sleep and respiratory patterns were analysed using polysomnography. Cognitive and physical performance was examined the next morning at sea level conditions. The study demonstrates that both zolpidem and zaleplon improved slow wave sleep at altitude, with zolpidem showing more marked effects than zaleplon. Both agents did not adversely affect respiration at altitude during the night, or cognitive or physical performance the next morning at the dosages used in this study. Thus, climbers may safely use both hypnotic agents.
