BACKGROUND: There are conflicting data on the effects of antipsychotic medications on delirium in patients in the intensive care unit (ICU). METHODS: In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, we assigned patients with acute respiratory failure or shock and hypoactive or hyperactive delirium to receive intravenous boluses of haloperidol (maximum dose, 20 mg daily), ziprasidone (maximum dose, 40 mg daily), or placebo. The volume and dose of a trial drug or placebo was halved or doubled at 12-hour intervals on the basis of the presence or absence of delirium, as detected with the use of the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU, and of side effects of the intervention. The primary end point was the number of days alive without delirium or coma during the 14-day intervention period. Secondary end points included 30-day and 90-day survival, time to freedom from mechanical ventilation, and time to ICU and hospital discharge. Safety end points included extrapyramidal symptoms and excessive sedation. RESULTS: Written informed consent was obtained from 1183 patients or their authorized representatives. Delirium developed in 566 patients (48%), of whom 89% had hypoactive delirium and 11% had hyperactive delirium. Of the 566 patients, 184 were randomly assigned to receive placebo, 192 to receive haloperidol, and 190 to receive ziprasidone. The median duration of exposure to a trial drug or placebo was 4 days (interquartile range, 3 to 7). The median number of days alive without delirium or coma was 8.5 (95% confidence interval [CI], 5.6 to 9.9) in the placebo group, 7.9 (95% CI, 4.4 to 9.6) in the haloperidol group, and 8.7 (95% CI, 5.9 to 10.0) in the ziprasidone group (P=0.26 for overall effect across trial groups). The use of haloperidol or ziprasidone, as compared with placebo, had no significant effect on the primary end point (odds ratios, 0.88 [95% CI, 0.64 to 1.21] and 1.04 [95% CI, 0.73 to 1.48], respectively). There were no significant between-group differences with respect to the secondary end points or the frequency of extrapyramidal symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: The use of haloperidol or ziprasidone, as compared with placebo, in patients with acute respiratory failure or shock and hypoactive or hyperactive delirium in the ICU did not significantly alter the duration of delirium. (Funded by the National Institutes of Health and the VA Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center; MIND-USA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01211522 .).
STUDY OBJECTIVE: Agitation in the emergency department (ED) can pose a threat to patient and provider safety; therefore, treatment is indicated. The purpose of this study is to compare haloperidol, olanzapine, midazolam, and ziprasidone to treat agitation. METHODS: This was a prospective observational study of consecutive patients receiving intramuscular medication to treat agitation in the ED. Medications were administered according to an a priori protocol in which the initial medication given was predetermined in the following 3-week blocks: haloperidol 5 mg, ziprasidone 20 mg, olanzapine 10 mg, midazolam 5 mg, and haloperidol 10 mg. The primary outcome was the proportion of patients adequately sedated at 15 minutes, assessed with the Altered Mental Status Scale. RESULTS: Seven hundred thirty-seven patients were enrolled (median age 40 years; 72% men). At 15 minutes, midazolam resulted in a greater proportion of patients adequately sedated (Altered Mental Status Scale <1) compared with ziprasidone (difference 18%; 95% confidence interval [CI] 6% to 29%), haloperidol 5 mg (difference 30%; 95% CI 19% to 41%), haloperidol 10 mg (difference 28%; 95% CI 17% to 39%), and olanzapine (difference 9%; 95% CI -1% to 20%). Olanzapine resulted in a greater proportion of patients adequately sedated at 15 minutes compared with haloperidol 5 mg (difference 20%; 95% CI 10% to 31%), haloperidol 10 mg (difference 18%; 95% CI 7% to 29%), and ziprasidone (difference 8%; 95% CI -3% to 19%). Adverse events were uncommon: cardiac arrest (0), extrapyramidal adverse effects (2; 0.3%), hypotension (5; 0.5%), hypoxemia (10; 1%), and intubation (4; 0.5%), and occurred at similar rates in each group. CONCLUSION: Intramuscular midazolam achieved more effective sedation in agitated ED patients at 15 minutes than haloperidol, ziprasidone, and perhaps olanzapine. Olanzapine provided more effective sedation than haloperidol. No differences in adverse events were identified.
Neuroleptic treatment in schizophrenic patients has been associated with sexual dysfunction, including impotence and decreased libido. Spontaneous ejaculation without sexual arousal during typical antipsychotic treatment is a rare condition that has been described with zuclopentixol, trifluoperazine, and thiothixene. Here, we are reporting a case of spontaneous orgasm with ziprasidone in a bipolar patient. This patient began to repeatedly experience spontaneous sexual arousal and orgasm, which she had never experienced in the past. Ziprasidone might be causing an increase in sexual orgasm by 5-HT2 receptor antagonism, which preclinical evidence suggests that it facilitates dopamine release in the cortex.
Ziprasidone hydrochloride is a second-generation antipsychotic drug employed for the treatment of schizophrenia and acute mania or mixed episodes associated with bipolar disorder. During the scale-up of ziprasidone hydrochloride, an unknown impurity was observed in the batches ranging from 0.10% to 0.15% by HPLC-UV analysis. The structure of an unknown impurity was proposed as 3,3'-methylenebis(5-(2-(4-(benzo[d]isothiazol-3-yl)piperazin-1-yl)ethyl)-6-chloroindolin-2-one) which is named as methylene ziprasidone dimer (MZD impurity). It was isolated from an enriched sample by preparative HPLC, and its structure was elucidated by comprehensive analysis of HRMS, 1D NMR ((1)H, (13)C), DEPT-135, 2D NMR (COSY, HSQC, HMBC) spectroscopy. A plausible mechanism for the formation of isolated impurity is proposed.
Twelve patients with Parkinson disease and psychosis were included in an open-label 12-week trial of ziprasidone. Two patients withdrew from the treatment because of adverse effects. The remaining 10 patients reported a significant improvement in psychiatric symptoms. Altogether, there was no deterioration of motor symptoms (UPDRS III score: basal 40.4 +/- 11.1, first month 41.1 +/- 10.8; final visit, 37.7 +/- 13.3). Two patients (20%) suffered a slight deterioration in motor symptoms and another patient suffered deterioration of gait. No analytic alterations or serious adverse effects that could limit the use of ziprasidone were observed. Although controlled trials are needed, the findings suggest that ziprasidone may be effective in parkinsonian patients with psychosis.
Packed with hemoglobin, an essential protein for oxygen transport, human erythrocytes are a suitable model system for testing the pleiotropic effects of lipophilic drugs. Our study investigated the interaction between antipsychotic drugs clozapine, ziprasidone, sertindole, and human hemoglobin under simulated physiological conditions. Analysis of protein fluorescence quenching at different temperatures and data obtained from the van't Hoff diagram and molecular docking indicate that the interactions are static and that the tetrameric human hemoglobin has one binding site for all drugs in the central cavity near alphabeta interfaces and is dominantly mediated through hydrophobic forces. The association constants were lower-moderate strength (~10(4) M(-1)), the highest observed for clozapine (2.2 x 10(4) M(-1) at 25  degrees C). The clozapine binding showed "friendly" effects: increased alpha-helical content, a higher melting point, and protein protection from free radical-mediated oxidation. On the other hand, bound ziprasidone and sertindole had a slightly pro-oxidative effect, increasing ferrihemoglobin content, a possible "foe". Since the interaction of proteins with drugs plays a vital role in their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties, the physiological significance of the obtained findings is briefly discussed.
This is a report on a case series of five patients with psychosis in Parkinson's disease who were treated successfully with an intramuscular injection of ziprasidone (10-20 mg) for acute agitation. No deterioration of motor function or other clinically relevant side effects were seen.
Ziprasidone is a second-generation antipsychotic with a lower propensity to cause extrapyramidal adverse effects that are seen at higher doses. We report a patient who developed acute dystonia, parkinsonism, and severe akathisia with ziprasidone 80 mg/d. These adverse effects subsided after dose reduction and specific treatment for akathisia and parkinsonism.
Ziprasidone is widely used in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. Despite its prevalence, there is a notable lack of population pharmacokinetics (PPK) studies on ziprasidone in serum, both domestically and internationally. This study aimed to comprehensively investigate the various factors influencing the PPK characteristics of Ziprasidone, thereby providing a scientific basis for personalized treatment strategies in clinical settings. This is a retrospective study. A non-linear mixed-effects modeling method was used for data analysis, with the ziprasidone PPK model established using the Phoenix NLME 8.1 software. Model evaluation employed goodness-of-fit plots, visual predictive checks, and Bootstrap methods to ensure reliability and accuracy. To further validate the model's applicability, data from an additional 30 patients meeting the same inclusion criteria but not included in the final model were collected for external validation. Simulations were performed to explore the personalized dosage regimens. This retrospective analysis collected 547 drug concentration data points from 185 psychiatric disorder patients, along with related medical records. The data included detailed demographic information (such as age, gender, weight), dosing regimens, laboratory test results, and concomitant medication details. In the final model, Ka was fixed at 0.5 h(-1) based on literature, and the population typical values for ziprasidone clearance (CL) and volume of distribution (V) were 18.74 L/h and 110.24 L, respectively. Co-administration of lorazepam and valproic acid significantly influenced the clearance of ziprasidone. Moreover, the model evaluation indicated good stability and predictive accuracy. A simple to use dosage regimen table was derived based on the results of simulations. This study successfully established and validated a PPK model for ziprasidone in Chinese patients with psychiatric disorders. The model provides a scientific reference for individualized dosing of ziprasidone and holds the potential to optimize treatment strategies, thereby enhancing therapeutic efficacy and safety.
It is widely known that discontinuation reactions can occur after neuroleptics are stopped resulting in dyskinesia through its effect on the nigrostriatal pathway. Less discussed is the concept of "supersensitivity psychosis" which has been described as a rapid onset of psychosis after a neuroleptic medication has been withdrawn. Although the concept of supersensitivity psychosis has been described with the discontinuation of some neuroleptics, it has not been described with ziprasidone. Furthermore, the following case report is the first time that this phenomenon has been described in an adolescent patient who has discontinued ziprasidone. Reasons for supersensitivity psychosis are explored in addition to suggestions about precautions about prescribing neuroleptics in young people.
We present and follow a series of three consecutive hospitalizations of a 36-year-old, African-American male with sickle cell anemia disease who presented with sickle cell crises and a new onset psychotic episode. After multiple hospitalizations for prior episodes of sickle cell crisis-induced pain, treated with rehydration, blood transfusions, and opiate medication, this hospitalization was the first time he developed psychosis. As such, we discuss the differential diagnosis of the latter, and effective adjunctive treatment with ziprasidone.
A case of neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) in a patient with Parkinson's disease (PD) is presented. The syndrome was precipitated by the atypical antipsychotic, ziprasidone. The challenge of recognizing NMS in a patient with underlying parkinsonian symptoms, where prominent symptom overlap can occur, is discussed.
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) exacerbations are potential medical emergencies treated with bronchodilators, glucocorticoids and supplemental oxygen. However, in extreme cases, adequate treatment requires mechanical ventilation via endotracheal intubation to correct the acid-base imbalance created by the disease process. We present a case of a 52-year-old female with COPD exacerbation requiring intubation who failed extubation multiple times while concurrently being treated with lorazepam, for agitation. Based on the evidence for increased carbon dioxide retention associated with benzodiazepine use, we weaned the patient off the lorazepam which in turn allowed the patient to be successfully weaned off the ventilator.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a fatal malignant tumor whose effective treatment has not been found. The redox state and proliferative activity of PDAC cells are maintained by the conversion of aspartic acid in the cytoplasm into oxaloacetate though aspartate aminotransferase 1 (GOT1). Therefore, GOT1 inhibitors as a potential approach for treating PDAC have attracted more attention of researchers. Ziprasidone effectively inhibited GOT1 in a non-competitive manner. The potential cytotoxicity and anti-proliferation effects of ziprasidone against PDAC cells in vitro and in vivo were evaluated. Ziprasidone can induce glutamine metabolism disorder and redox state imbalance of PDAC cells by targeting GOT1, thereby inhibiting proliferation, preventing migration, and inducing apoptosis. Ziprasidone displayed significant in vivo antitumor efficacy in SW1990 cell-derived xenografts. What's more, knockdown of GOT1 in SW1990 reduced the anti-proliferative effects of ziprasidone. As a novel GOT1 inhibitor, ziprasidone may be a lead compound for the treatment of PDAC. KEY MESSAGES: Small molecule inhibitors targeting GOT1 may provide a therapeutic target in PDAC. Ziprasidone effectively inhibited GOT1 enzyme in a non-competitive manner. Ziprasidone repressed glutamine metabolism and inhibited the growth of tumor in vivo. Knockdown of GOT1 decreased the anti-proliferative effects of ziprasidone.
Huntington's disease (HD) is a relentlessly progressive neuropsychiatric disorder with an underlying autosomal dominantly inherited genetic defect. Classical antipsychotics (i.e. phenothiazines or butyrophenones) are the most used medication to reduce the (probably dopamine-born) choreiform hyperkinesias. Ziprasidone is the latest of a new class of atypical antipsychotics; it has not been studied so far in this indication. We report three genetically confirmed HD patients who improved significantly in several categories of the motor scale of the Unified HD Rating Scale.
Forty-six patients (36 male, mean age 11.9 +/- 2.6) with a variety of diagnoses and with significant aggressive behavior were treated in an open, non-randomized fashion with Aripiprazole or Ziprasidone. Patients were diagnosed with the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview and the Child/Adolescent Symptom Inventory. The primary outcome measure was the Overt Aggression Scale (OAS). After 2 months, 34 patients were still in treatment. The average improvement of the OAS in these 34 patients was 63%. Clinical Global Impression-Improvement Scale was 2.1 +/- 1.2. Neither at baseline, nor at 2 months, were there any statistically significant differences between the Aripiprazole and Ziprasidone groups. Sedation was the most common side effect.
