Herein, we report a highly efficient and unprecedented approach for heteroarylation of congested alpha-bromoamides via electrophilic aromatic substitution of imidazo-heteroarenes and indolizines under mild reaction conditions (room temperature, metal, and oxidant free). The participation of an in situ generated aza-oxyallyl cation as an alkylating agent is the hallmark of this transformation. The method was readily adapted to synthesize novel imidazo-heteroarene-fused dibenzoazepinone architectures of potential medicinal value.
INTRODUCTION: Zolpidem is one of the most commonly prescribed nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic drugs for insomnia. Published epidemiological studies linked zolpidem with the risk of suicide. However, to date, no meta-analysis investigated this association. Hence, we systematically reviewed and meta-analysed the current evidence from real-world studies reporting the risk of suicide with the use of zolpidem. METHODS: Medline (Ovid), Embase (Ovid), and PsycINFO databases were searched from inception till June 2021 for real-world evidence studies reporting the risk of suicide with the use of zolpidem. The quality assessment of included studies was assessed using the New-Castle Ottawa Scale (NOS). Random-effect meta-analysis was performed using a generic inverse variance method. RESULTS: This meta-analysis was based on four studies with 344,753 participants, of which 42,279 were zolpidem users. The methodological quality of all the included studies was of high quality. A significantly increased risk of suicide or suicide attempt was found in zolpidem users compared to non-users, with a pooled relative risk of 1.88 (95% CI: 1.54 - 2.30). Furthermore, an increased risk of suicidal death was observed in zolpidem users compared to non-users, with a pooled relative risk of 1.82 (95% CI: 1.43 - 2.30). Dose-response analysis also revealed a significantly increased risk of suicide in patients receiving >/= 180cDDD (cumulative defined daily doses) of zolpidem (124 times), followed by 90-179cDDD (113 times) and <90cDDD (93 times) of zolpidem compared to non-users. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, zolpidem use was associated with an increased risk of suicide or suicide attempt and suicidal death. Therefore, careful prescribing practices must be followed by considering the risk-benefit profile.
PURPOSE: Arousals may contribute to the pathogenesis of sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) and central sleep apnea (CSA). We aimed to determine the effect of the nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic zolpidem on the frequency of respiratory-related arousals and central apnea in patients with moderate-to-severe SDB. We hypothesized that zolpidem decreases the severity of SDB by decreasing the frequency of respiratory-related arousals. METHODS: Patients with apnea-hypopnea index >/= 15 events/hour and central apnea-hypopnea index >/= 5 events/hour underwent a sleep study on zolpidem 5 mg and a sleep study with no medication in a randomized order. The respiratory arousal index was compared between the two studies using a randomized crossover design. Sleep, respiratory, and physiologic parameters, including the CO(2) reserve and the respiratory arousal threshold, were also compared. RESULTS: Eleven participants completed the study. Compared to no treatment, zolpidem reduced the respiratory arousal index (39.7 +/- 7.7 vs. 23.3 +/- 4.4 events/h, P = 0.031). Zolpidem also lowered the total apnea-hypopnea index (55.6 +/- 8.5 vs. 41.3 +/- 7.5 events/hour, P = 0.033) but did not affect other clinical and physiologic parameters. Compared to control, zolpidem did not widen CO(2) reserve (- 0.44 +/- 1.47 vs. - 0.63 +/- 0.86 mmHg, P = 0.81). The respiratory arousal threshold did not show a significant change on zolpidem compared to control (- 8.72 +/- 2.1 vs. - 8.25 +/- 2.81 cmH(2)O, P = 0.41). CONCLUSION: Nocturnal arousals and overall SDB severity were reduced with a single dose of zolpidem in patients with moderate-to-severe sleep-disordered breathing with increased susceptibility for central apnea. Zolpidem did not widen the CO(2) reserve or increase the arousal threshold. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov. Sleep and Breathing in the General Population - Chemical Stimuli (NCT04720547).
Zolpidem is a representative of non-benzodiazepine hypnotics. Recent epidemiologic studies have reported increased fracture risk in patients taking zolpidem, but the results have been inconsistent. The present meta-analysis shows that the use of zolpidem is associated with an increased risk of fractures. PURPOSE: Previous studies have reported inconsistent findings regarding the association between the use of zolpidem and the risk of fractures. We performed a systematic literature review and meta-analysis to assess the association. METHODS: We identified relevant studies by searching MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, and PsycINFO without language restrictions (until August 2014). Methodological quality was assessed based on the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS). RESULTS: A total of 1,092,925 participants (129,148 fracture cases) were included from 9 studies (4 cohort, 4 case-control, and 1 case-crossover study). Overall, the use of zolpidem was associated with an increased risk of fracture (relative risk [RR] 1.92, 95 % CI 1.65-2.24; I (2) = 50.9 %). High-quality subgroups (cohort studies, high NOS score, adjusted for any confounder, or adjusted for osteoporosis) had higher RRs than the corresponding low-quality subgroups (high quality, 1.94-2.76; low quality, 1.55-1.79). Of note, the risk for hip fracture was higher than that for fracture at any site (hip fracture, RR 2.80, 95 % CI 2.19-3.58; fracture at any site, RR 1.84, 95 % CI 1.67-2.03; P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: The use of zolpidem may increase the risk of fractures. Clinicians should be cautious when prescribing zolpidem for patients at high risk of fracture.
Zolpidem is currently the global market leader in the hypnotic arena. Recently several novel zolpidem formulations have been launched in the U.S. or are in the preregistration development phase. These comprise an extended-release form, two types of sublingual formulations and an oral spray. The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic effects of these formulations are reviewed.
The Cyclic Alternating Pattern (CAP) is a physiologic structure of normal non-REM (NREM) sleep, functionally correlated to long-lasting arousal instability. In 12 healthy volunteers, a continuous 45 dB (A) white noise induced no remarkable changes on the standard sleep parameters. However, compared to the baseline conditions, the acoustic perturbation determined a significant increase of the Cyclic Alternating Pattern Rate (CAPR), that measures the amount of CAP during sleep. Ten mg of zolpidem, a novel imidazopyridine hypnotic compound, did not modify the structure of unperturbed sleep, but induced a highly significant reduction of the increased values of CAP Rate due to white noise. The homeostatic function of CAP is stressed. CAPR appears to be a highly sensitive indicator of environmental modification during sleep.
BACKGROUND: Daridorexant, a dual orexin receptor antagonist approved in early 2022, reduces wake after sleep onset without reducing the number of awakenings in patients with insomnia. The objective of this post hoc analysis was to explore the effect of daridorexant on the number, duration, and distribution of night-time wake bouts, and their correlation with daytime functioning. METHODS: Adults with insomnia disorder were randomized 1:1:1:1:1:1 to placebo, zolpidem 10 mg, or daridorexant 5, 10, 25, or 50 mg in a phase II dose-finding study, and 1:1:1 to placebo or daridorexant 25 or 50 mg in a pivotal phase III study. We analyzed polysomnography data for daridorexant 25 and 50 mg, zolpidem 10 mg, and placebo groups. Polysomnography was conducted at baseline, then on Days 1/2, 15/16, and 28/29 in the phase II study, and Months 1 and 3 in the phase III study. The number, duration, and distribution of wake bouts (>/= 0.5 min) were assessed. RESULTS: Data from 1111 patients (phase II study: daridorexant 50 mg [n = 61], zolpidem 10 mg [n = 60], placebo [n = 60]; phase III study: daridorexant 25 mg [n = 310], daridorexant 50 mg [n = 310], placebo [n = 310]) were analyzed. Long wake bouts were defined as > 6 min. Compared with placebo, daridorexant 50 mg reduced overall wake time (p < 0.05; all time points, both studies), the odds of experiencing long wake bouts (p < 0.001; Months 1 and 3, phase III study), and the cumulative duration of long wake bouts (p < 0.01; all time points, both studies). Reductions in long wake bouts were sustained through the second half of the night and correlated with improvements in daytime functioning. An increase in the cumulative duration of short wake bouts was observed with daridorexant 50 mg (p < 0.01 vs placebo, Months 1 and 3, phase III study); this was uncorrelated with daytime functioning. CONCLUSION: Daridorexant reduced the number and duration of longer wake bouts throughout the night compared with placebo, corresponding with improved daytime functioning. CLINICAL TRIALS: Clinicaltrials.gov NCT02839200 (registered July 20, 2016), NCT03545191 (registered June 4, 2018).
BACKGROUND: Chronic kidney disease (CKD)-associated pruritus (CKD-aP) contributes to poor quality of life, including reduced sleep quality and poor sleep quality is a source of patient stress and is linked to lower health-related quality of life. This study aimed to investigate the effectiveness of zolpidem 10 mg and acupressure therapy on foot acupoints to improve the sleep quality and overall quality of life among hemodialysis patients suffering from CKD-aP. METHOD: A multicenter, prospective, randomized, parallel-design, open label interventional study to estimate the effectiveness of zolpidem (10 mg) oral tablets versus acupressure on sleep quality and quality of life in patients with CKD-aP on hemodialysis. A total of 58 hemodialysis patients having sleep disturbance due to CKD-aP completed the entire 8-week follow-up. The patients were divided into a control (acupressure) group of 28 patients and an intervention (zolpidem) group of 30 patients. RESULTS: A total of 58 patients having CKD-aP and sleep disturbance were recruited. In the control group there was a reduction in the PSQI score with a mean +/- SD from 12.28 +/- 3.59 to 9.25 +/- 3.99, while in the intervention group the reduction in PSQI score with a mean +/- SD was from 14.73 +/- 4.14 to 10.03 +/- 4.04 from baseline to endpoint. However, the EQ5D index score and EQ-visual analogue scale (VAS) at baseline for the control group with a mean +/- SD was 0.49 +/- 0.30 and 50.17 +/- 8.65, respectively, while for the intervention group the values were 0.62 +/- 0.26 and 47.17 +/- 5.82, respectively. The mean EQ5D index score in the control group improved from 0.49 +/- 0.30 to 0.53 +/- 0.30, but in the intervention group there was no statistical improvement in mean EQ5D index score from 0.62 +/- 0.26 to 0.62 +/- 0.27 from baseline to week 8. The EQ 5D improved in both groups and the EQ-VAS score was 2.67 points higher at week 8 as compared to baseline in the control group, while in the intervention group the score was 3.33 points higher at week 8 as compared to baseline. Comparing with baseline, the PSQI scores were significantly reduced after week 4 and week 8 (P =  < .001). Furthermore, at the end of the study, the PSQI scores were significantly higher in the control as compared to the intervention group (P = .012). CONCLUSION: An improvement in sleep quality and quality of life among CKD-aP patients on hemodialysis has been observed in both the control and intervention groups. Zolpidem and acupressure safety profiling showed no severe adverse effect other that drowsiness, nausea and daytime sleeping already reported in literature of zolpidem.
Zolpidem is a non-benzodiazepine agent indicated for treatment of insomnia. While zolpidem crosses the placenta, little is known about its safety in pregnancy. We assessed associations between self-reported zolpidem use 1 month before pregnancy through to the end of the third month ("early pregnancy") and specific birth defects using data from two multi-site case-control studies: National Birth Defects Prevention Study and Slone Epidemiology Center Birth Defects Study. Analysis included 39,711 birth defect cases and 23,035 controls without a birth defect. For defects with >/= 5 exposed cases, we used logistic regression with Firth's penalised likelihood to estimate adjusted odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals, considering age at delivery, race/ethnicity, education, body mass index, parity, early-pregnancy antipsychotic, anxiolytic, antidepressant use, early-pregnancy opioid use, early-pregnancy smoking, and study as potential covariates. For defects with three-four exposed cases, we estimated crude odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. Additionally, we explored differences in odds ratios using propensity score-adjustment and conducted a probabilistic bias analysis of exposure misclassification. Overall, 84 (0.2%) cases and 46 (0.2%) controls reported early-pregnancy zolpidem use. Seven defects had sufficient sample size to calculate adjusted odds ratios, which ranged from 0.76 for cleft lip to 2.18 for gastroschisis. Four defects had odds ratios > 1.8. All confidence intervals included the null. Zolpidem use was rare. We could not calculate adjusted odds ratios for most defects and estimates are imprecise. Results do not support a large increase in risk, but smaller increases in risk for certain defects cannot be ruled out.
No prior studies have evaluated the efficacy and safety of zolpidem and zopiclone to treat insomnia of demented patients. This randomized, triple-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial used these drugs to treat patients with probable, late onset Alzheimer's dementia (AD) (DSM V and NINCDS-ADRDA criteria) exhibiting insomnia (DSM V criteria and nocturnal NPI scores >/= 2). Actigraphic records were performed for 7 days at baseline and for 14 days during the treatment period in 62 patients aged 80.5 years in average and randomized at a 1:1:1 ratio for administration of zolpidem 10 mg/day, zopiclone 7.5 mg/day or placebo. Primary endpoint was the main nocturnal sleep duration (MNSD), whereas secondary outcomes were the proportion of the night time slept, awake time after sleep onset (WASO), nocturnal awakenings, total daytime sleep time and daytime naps. Cognitive and functional domains were tested before and after drug/placebo use. Three participants under zopiclone use had intervention interrupted due to intense daytime sedation and worsened agitation with wandering. Zopiclone produced an 81 min increase in MNSD (95% confidence interval (CI): -0.8, 163.2), a 26 min reduction in WASO (95% CI: -56.2, 4.8) and a 2-episode decrease in awakening per night (95% CI: -4.0, 0.4) in average compared to placebo. Zolpidem yielded no significant difference in MNSD despite a significant 22 min reduction in WASO (95% CI: -52.5, 8.3) and a reduction of 1 awakening each night (95% CI: -3.4, 1.2) in relation to placebo. There was a 1-point reduction in mean performance in the symbols search test among zolpidem users (95% CI: -4.1, 1.5) and an almost eight-point reduction in average scores in the digit-symbol coding test among zopiclone users (95% CI: -21.7, 6.2). In summary, short-term use of zolpidem or zopiclone by older insomniacs with AD appears to be clinically helpful, even though safety and tolerance remain issues to be personalized in healthcare settings and further investigated in subsequent trials. This trial was registered in ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03075241.
Zolpidem is an imidazopyridine, a chemically novel nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic agent which acts at the benzodiazepine omega 1-receptor subtype in the brain. With a rapid onset of action and short elimination half-life, it reduces the latency to and prolongs the duration of sleep in patients with insomnia, yet has no major effects on sleep stages when given in dosages of 5 to 20 mg nightly. Rebound effects on withdrawal of the drug have not been observed. Unlike benzodiazepines, zolpidem has no myorelaxant or anticonvulsant effects and its effects on anxiety appear to be minor. While zolpidem aids sedation, and may reduce memory or psychomotor function within the first 2 hours after administration of single oral doses, its use as a surgical premedicant remains to be established. Adverse effects are predominantly CNS and gastrointestinal in nature. Altered pharmacokinetics may lead to an increase in dose-proportionate adverse effects in the elderly and in patients with renal dysfunction. Limited evidence to date suggests that the dependence liability of zolpidem is minimal. Thus, zolpidem is an interesting alternative to benzodiazepines in the treatment of insomnia, with properties that potentially offer worthwhile advantages in this therapeutic area if they are confirmed with wider clinical experience.
RATIONALE: Zolpidem, a non-benzodiazepine sedative-hypnotic, is considered safer for the treatment of insomnia compared to benzodiazepines. However, in recent years, there have been growing reports of Zolpidem dependence, addiction, and withdrawal symptoms. We reported a case of Zolpidem addiction and successful detoxification, reviewed similar cases in the literature, and proposed a potential mechanism underlying Zolpidem addiction. PATIENT CONCERNS: The patient was a 46-year-old Tibetan woman who had been using Zolpidem intermittently to treat insomnia for at least 8 years. She was overweight, with a BMI of 28.04 kg/m(2), and had hypertension, diabetes, a 20-year smoking history, and several years of alcohol abuse, often seeking instant gratification. She voluntarily increased both the dosage and frequency of Zolpidem, experiencing euphoria, anxiolysis, and increased appetite at higher doses, which led her to gradually escalate her dosage to 280 mg per day in divided doses. However, upon stopping Zolpidem, she experienced withdrawal symptoms, including insomnia, tension, and palpitations. DIAGNOSES: She was diagnosed with a combination of hypnotic use disorder, anxiety disorder, hypertension, and diabetes. INTERVENTIONS: She underwent diazepam replacement therapy, along with antianxiety medications and mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, to address Zolpidem addiction. OUTCOMES: After 13 days of inpatient treatment, the patient successfully quit Zolpidem. During a 3-month follow-up, she returned to work and remained free from Zolpidem use. LESSONS: We speculate that Zolpidem addiction is likely linked to the drug's euphoric effects and certain patient characteristics, such as sensation-seeking behavior. A comprehensive approach, involving both pharmacological and psychological interventions, is essential for an effective detoxification strategy for Zolpidem addiction.
Zolpidem (Ambien(R)) is one of the "Z" drugs often used to improve sleep in older patients and those suffering from insomnia. Schwope, D.M., DePriest, A., Black, D.L., Caplan, Y.H., Cone, E.J., Heltsley, R. (2014) Determing zolpidem compliance: urinary metabolite detection and prevalence in chronic pain patients . Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 38, 513-518 reported that zolpidem in urine is not very prevalent being present <23% of the time in patient urine while the major metabolite, zolpidem 4-phenyl carboxylic acid (ZCA), is much more prevalent in urine with positive rates as high as 50% of the patient samples reviewed. Results from patient testing over a year's time are in agreement with the reported zolpidem results. However, the data observed herein for ZCA are not consistent with the earlier report. These data suggest that monitoring ZCA may result in even higher levels of positivity. Further, while the Food and Drug Administration has pointed out that female dosing should be half that given to males, results of this population testing indicate that the majority of patients (83% male and 73% female) receive 10 mg/day or 12.5 mg/day for Ambien CR(R) with females demonstrating statistically significantly higher levels of ZCA albeit zolpidem levels are not statistically significantly different between men and women. Estimates of patient positivity are dependent upon the value of the limit of quantification (LOQ) as demonstrated by the zolpidem results herein (LOQ = 50 ng/mL vs. 4 ng/mL). However, even with a much higher LOQ of 50 ng/mL for ZCA in this work, the positivity from ZCA results is significantly higher (e.g., 64.8%) than reported earlier (50.3%). Nevertheless, these data support the addition of ZCA for monitoring zolpidem in urine.
IMPORTANCE: Insomnia disorder is prevalent and associated with health risks in older adults; however, efficacy and safety issues with existing treatments create significant unmet needs in this patient population. OBJECTIVE: To compare treatment with the orexin receptor antagonist lemborexant with placebo and zolpidem tartrate extended release in participants with insomnia disorder. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The Study of the Efficacy and Safety of Lemborexant in Subjects 55 Years and Older With Insomnia Disorder (SUNRISE 1) clinical trial was a global randomized double-blind parallel-group placebo-controlled active-comparator phase 3 study conducted at 67 sites in North America and Europe from May 31, 2016, to January 30, 2018. Data analyses were conducted from January 31, 2018, to September 10, 2018. Participants were 55 years and older with insomnia disorder characterized by reported sleep maintenance difficulties and confirmed by sleep history, sleep diary, and polysomnography. Participants could have also had sleep onset difficulties. INTERVENTIONS: Participants received placebo, zolpidem tartrate extended release (6.25 mg), or lemborexant (5 mg or 10 mg) for 1 month at bedtime. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Paired polysomnograms were collected at baseline, the first 2 nights, and the last 2 nights of treatment. The primary end point was the change from baseline in latency to persistent sleep for lemborexant therapy vs placebo. Key secondary end points were changes from baseline in sleep efficiency and wake-after-sleep onset compared with placebo, and wake-after-sleep onset in the second half of the night compared with zolpidem therapy. RESULTS: Among 1006 participants randomized (placebo, n = 208; zolpidem, n = 263; lemborexant 5 mg, n = 266; and lemborexant 10 mg, n = 269), 869 (86.4%) were women and the median age was 63 years (range, 55-88 years). Both doses of lemborexant therapy demonstrated statistically significant greater changes from baseline on objective sleep onset as assessed by latency to persistent sleep (log transformed) that was measured using polysomnography at the end of 1 month of treatment (nights 29 and 30) compared with placebo (primary end point for least squares geometric means treatment ratio vs placebo: for lemborexant 5 mg, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.67-0.89; P < .001; for lemborexant 10 mg, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.63-0.83; P < .001). For nights 29 and 30, as measured using polysomnography, the mean change from baseline in sleep efficiency (LSM treatment difference vs placebo for lemborexant 5 mg, 7.1%; 95% CI, 5.6%-8.5%; P < .001 and for lemborexant 10 mg, 8.0%; 95% CI, 6.6%-9.5%; P < .001) and wake-after-sleep onset (least squares mean treatment ratio vs placebo for lemborexant 5 mg, -24.0 min; 95% CI, -30.0 to -18.0 min; P < .001 and for lemborexant 10 mg, -25.4 min; 95% CI, -31.4 to -19.3 min; P < .001) were significantly greater for both doses of lemborexant therapy compared with placebo. Also, for nights 29 and 30, wake-after-sleep onset in the second half of the night (least squares mean treatment difference vs zolpidem for lemborexant 5 mg, -6.7 min; 95% CI, -11.2 to -2.2 min; P = .004 and for lemborexant 10 mg, -8.0 min; 95% CI, -12.5 to -3.5 min; P < .001) was significantly greater for both doses of lemborexant therapy compared with zolpidem therapy measured using polysomnography. Six participants (4 in the zolpidem group and 2 in the lemborexant 5 mg group) reported serious adverse events; none were treatment-related. Other adverse events were mostly mild or moderate in severity. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this randomized clinical trial, lemborexant therapy significantly improved both sleep onset and sleep maintenance, including in the second half of the night, compared with both placebo and zolpidem measured objectively using polysomnography. Lemborexant therapy was well tolerated. TRIAL REGISTRATIONS: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02783729; EudraCT identifier: 2015-001463-39.
INTRODUCTION: The non-benzodiazepine sedative hypnotic (NBSH) eszopiclone improves polysomnography (PSG) quality and continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) adherence. It is unclear whether zolpidem has the same effect and neither NBSH has been studied in populations with milder forms of obstructive sleep apnea. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis on patients undergoing level I PSG at our institution. Patients are pre-medicated with NBSHs at the discretion of the sleep physician. We compared PSG/CPAP titration quality and subsequent CPAP adherence for patients receiving NBSHs or no pre-study medication. We adjusted for obstructive sleep apnea pre-test probability (PTP), arousal threshold, and other factors showing differences at baseline. RESULTS: Data on 560 patients were analyzed. Mean age and body mass index were 42.2 +/- 10.1 and 28.8 +/- 4.5, respectively. Median apnea hypopnea index was 12.9 (6.4-25.3), 100 (18.0%) patients had normal studies, 97 (17.3%) were split, and 457 (81.6%) had a respiratory low-arousal threshold. After adjusting for differences at baseline, neither NBSH was associated with sleep efficiency, wake after sleep onset, or total sleep time on PSG. After adjustment, patients receiving eszopiclone had a higher apnea hypopnea index at the final CPAP pressure (beta = 14.2; 95% confidence intervals (CI) 7.2-21.2; p < 0.001) and were more likely to have an unacceptable titration (odds ratio (OR) = 6.6; 95% CI 2.0-21.0; p = 0.002). When only split-night studies were examined, there were no differences in any adherence variables across or between categories. CONCLUSIONS: In a population with predominantly mild obstructive sleep apnea, NBSHs did not improve PSG or CPAP titration quality and did not increase CPAP adherence. There was no difference in effect between eszopiclone and zolpidem.
BACKGROUND: Oral fluid zolpidem detection in the settings of drug-facilitated crime and roadside drug testing indicates recent zolpidem intake. Zolpidem pharmacokinetics in classical biological matrices such as blood and urine have been described; however, reports of such data based on oral fluids are limited. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to describe the pharmacokinetics of zolpidem and its major metabolite zolpidem phenyl-4-carboxylic acid (ZPCA) in oral fluids after intake. METHODS: Ten milligrams of zolpidem tartrate tablets were orally administered to 14 volunteers, and oral fluid samples were collected at various times up to 72 hours and analyzed via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with post-column reagent addition. RESULTS: Both zolpidem and ZPCA could be detected in oral fluid after 1 hour and were rapidly eliminated, with half-lives of 2.77 +/- 0.71 hours and 5.11 +/- 0.67 hours, respectively. Maximum zolpidem concentrations (36.73 +/- 10.89 ng/mL) occurred at 2 +/- 0.52 hours, and maximum ZPCA concentrations (0.28 +/- 0.16 ng/mL) occurred at 2 +/- 0.37 hours. Zolpidem/ZPCA ratios decreased after zolpidem intake, an observation that might be helpful for determining the time of drug use. CONCLUSION: The results showed that the measurement of zolpidem in oral fluid can be used for the non-invasive monitoring of zolpidem consumption and misuse in drug-facilitated crime and roadside drug testing settings.
Zolpidem (ZOL) is a short-acting hypnotic that is sometimes used in drug-facilitated crimes such as sexual assaults, robbery and homicides. Therefore, it is important to understand the metabolism of ZOL. This study quantified ZOL and its metabolites, including two carboxylic acids (zolpidem phenyl-4-carboxylic acid [M1] and 6-carboxylic acid [M2]) and four hydroxyzolpidems (4-(hydroxymethyl)phenyl zolpidem [M3], 6-hydroxymethyl zolpidem [M4], 7-hydroxyzolpidem [7OH] and 8-hydroxyzolpidem [8OH]) in postmortem urine using liquid chromatography--triple quadrupole mass spectrometry. The concentration of M1 was highest in all cases, followed by total 7OH in five of six samples. The concentrations of M2 and total M4 were relatively high. Most of M4 and 8OH were excreted as conjugates, whereas up to 55% of 7OH was excreted in its free form. Peaks corresponding to zolpidem dihydrodiol (ZHDH), dihydro(hydroxy)zolpidem cysteine adduct (DHZCys) and zolpidem cysteine adduct (ZCys) were also detected in all the urine samples. ZDHD was excreted as conjugates, whereas almost all DHZCys and ZCys were in their free form.
Zolpidem is a sedative that could be used to drug victims, but its suitability to dissolve in drinks is unknown. In this small study, we added either crushed or whole tablets of zolpidem hemitartrate to carbonated beverages or still water to observe how this affected the taste and appearance. Also, concentrations were measured by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry at different time intervals. Two crushed tablets (20 mg) in cider (250 mL) lead to a maximum concentration of 84 mg/L zolpidem base after 30 min, while the corresponding concentration after adding fifteen tablets (150 mg) was 467 mg/L. There was little change in taste, but froth and turbidity were observed when adding high doses to carbonated beverages. Carbonated beverages spiked with 20 mg of crushed zolpidem hemitartrate tablets reached concentrations that could cause impairment. Spiking with 150 mg could possibly be lethal if several mouthfuls were ingested.
A gas chromatography-electron ionization-tandem mass spectrometric (GC-EI-MS/MS) method was developed and validated for determination of the major metabolites of zolpidem, zolpidem phenyl-4-carboxylic acid (ZPCA) and zolpidem 6-carboxylic acid (ZCA) in human hair. The sample preparation procedure involves decontamination, mechanical pulverization, incubation, extraction and purification prior to instrumental analysis. The extracts were derivatized using hexafluoroisopropanol and heptafluorobutyric anhydride and analyzed by GC-EI-MS/MS. The linear ranges were 8-100 pg/mg for ZPCA and 16-200 pg/mg for ZCA, with the correlation coefficients >0.997. The limits of detection were 1.8 pg/mg for ZPCA and 1.7 pg/mg for ZCA. The recoveries ranged from 77.6 to 111.7%. The intra- and inter-day precisions were within 16.9 and 11.7%, while intra- and inter-day accuracies were -7.0-8.7 and -2.8-7.8%, respectively. The developed method was applied for the analysis of forensic hair samples obtained from suspected zolpidem abusers and the following concentration ranges were monitored: ZPCA 11.9-35.9 pg/mg and ZCA 16.6-21.8 pg/mg. The method proved to be suitable for picogram-level determination of ZPCA and ZCA in human hair.
The study aims the development and validation of a LC-MS/MS method for the identification and quantification of benzodiazepines and zolpidem in nails as alternative keratinized matrix to hair in long-term monitoring of anxiolytic and hypnotic drugs. Both fingernail and toenail samples (1-2 mm) were collected by clipping the excess overhang of the nail from volunteers and from postmortem cases. They were washed twice with organic solvents, dried under nitrogen stream, pulverized, immersed in a methanol solution (internal standard: diazepam-D5) and sonicated up to two hours. The solution was then direct injected in the LC-MS/MS system. Mass spectrometry was set in MRM mode, selecting two transitions for each substance. 32 analytes among benzodiazepines, metabolites and hypnotics were included in the list. The method fulfilled the internationally required criteria for validation. Limits of detection ranged from 0.03 pg/mg (zolpidem) to 13.1 pg/mg (bromazepam). 9 subjects under therapy were positive at 7 different benzodiazepines and/or metabolites (lorazepam, desalkylflurazepam, bromazepam, diazepam, alprazolam, lormetazepam and prazepam), while 5 molecules were measured in 4 postmortem cases (diazepam, desmethyldiazepam, delorazepam, 7-aminoclonazepam and zolpidem). In vitro experiments on eight authentic samples suggested that benzodiazepines in nails are influenced by the prolonged exposure to chlorinated water.
